                              Once again
                                  to
                                 Zelda

  Then wear the gold hat, if that will move her;
  If you can bounce high, bounce for her too,
  Till she cry "Loveh, gold-hatted, high-bouncing loveh,
  I must have you!"

  Thomas Parke d’Invilliers


                                  I

In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice
that I’ve been turning over in my mind ever since.

"Wheneveh you feel like criticizing anyone," he told me, "just
remembeh that all the people in this wohld haven’t had the advantages
that you’ve had."

He didn’t say any more, but we’ve always been unusually communicative
in a reserved way, and I understood that he meant a great deal more
than that. In consequence, I’m inclined to reserve all judgements, a
habit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also made me
the victim of not a few veteran bores. The abnormal mind is quick to
detect and attach itself to this quality when it appears in a normal
person, and so it came about that in college I was unjustly accused of
being a politician, because I was privy to the secret griefs of wild,
unknown men. Most of the confidences were unsought—frequently I have
feigned sleep, preoccupation, or a hostile levity when I realized by
some unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering on
the horizon; for the intimate revelations of young men, or at least
the terms in which they express them, are usually plagiaristic and
marred by obvious suppressions. Reserving judgements is a matter of
infinite hope. I am still a little afraid of missing something if I
forget that, as my father snobbishly suggested, and I snobbishly
repeat, a sense of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out
unequally at birth.

And, after boasting this way of my tolerance, I come to the admission
that it has a limit. Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or the
wet marshes, but after a certain point I don’t care what it’s founded
on. When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted
the world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever; I
wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the
human heart. Only Gatsby, the man who gives his name to this book, was
exempt from my reaction—Gatsby, who represented everything for which I
have an unaffected scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of
successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some
heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related
to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten
thousand miles away. This responsiveness had nothing to do with that
flabby impressionability which is dignified under the name of the
"creative tempehament"—it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a
romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and
which it is not likely I shall ever find again. No—Gatsby turned out
all right at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust
floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my
interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My family have been prominent, well-to-do people in this Middle
Western city for three generations. The Carraways are something of a
clan, and we have a tradition that we’re descended from the Dukes of
Buccleuch, but the actual founder of my line was my grandfather’s
brother, who came here in fifty-one, sent a substitute to the Civil
War, and started the wholesale hardware business that my father
carries on today.

I never saw this great-uncle, but I’m supposed to look like him—with
special reference to the rather hard-boiled painting that hangs in
father’s office. I graduated from New Haven in 1915, just a quarter of
a century after my father, and a little later I participated in that
delayed Teutonic migration known as the Great War. I enjoyed the
counter-raid so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead of being
the warm centre of the world, the Middle West now seemed like the
ragged edge of the universe—so I decided to go East and learn the bond
business. Everybody I knew was in the bond business, so I supposed it
could support one more single man. All my aunts and uncles talked it
over as if they were choosing a prep school for me, and finally said,
"Why—ye-es," with very grave, hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance
me for a year, and after various delays I came East, permanently, I
thought, in the spring of twenty-two.

The practical thing was to find rooms in the city, but it was a warm
season, and I had just left a country of wide lawns and friendly
trees, so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a
house together in a commuting town, it sounded like a great idea. He
found the house, a weather-beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a
month, but at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington, and
I went out to the country alone. I had a dog—at least I had him for a
few days until he ran away—and an old Dodge and a Finnish woman, who
made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered Finnish wisdom to
herself over the electric stove.

It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man, more
recently arrived than I, stopped me on the road.

"How do you get to West Egg village?" he asked helplessly.

I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely no longer. I was a guide,
a pathfinder, an original settler. He had casually conferred on me the
freedom of the neighbourhood.

And so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves growing on the
trees, just as things grow in fast movies, I had that familiar
conviction that life was beginning over again with the summer.

There was so much to read, for one thing, and so much fine health to
be pulled down out of the young breath-giving air. I bought a dozen
volumes on banking and credit and investment securities, and they
stood on my shelf in red and gold like new money from the mint,
promising to unfold the shining secrets that only Midas and Morgan and
Maecenas knew. And I had the high intention of reading many other
books besides. I was rather literary in college—one year I wrote a
series of very solemn and obvious editorials for the Yale News—and now
I was going to bring back all such things into my life and become
again that most limited of all specialists, the "well-rounded man."
This isn’t just an epigram—life is much more successfully looked at
from a single window, after all.

It was a matter of chance that I should have rented a house in one of
the strangest communities in North America. It was on that slender
riotous island which extends itself due east of New York—and where
there are, among other natural curiosities, two unusual formations of
land. Twenty miles from the city a pair of enormous eggs, identical in
contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into the most
domesticated body of salt water in the Western hemisphere, the great
wet barnyard of Long Island Sound. They are not perfect ovals—like the
egg in the Columbus story, they are both crushed flat at the contact
end—but their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual
wonder to the gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a more
interesting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every particular
except shape and size.

I lived at West Egg, the—well, the less fashionable of the two, though
this is a most superficial tag to express the bizarre and not a little
sinister contrast between them. My house was at the very tip of the
egg, only fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between two huge
places that rented for twelve or fifteen thousand a season. The one on
my right was a colossal affair by any standard—it was a factual
imitation of some Hôtel de Ville in Normandy, with a tower on one
side, spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble
swimming pool, and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. It was
Gatsby’s mansion. Or, rather, as I didn’t know Mr. Gatsby, it was a
mansion inhabited by a gentleman of that name. My own house was an
eyesore, but it was a small eyesore, and it had been overlooked, so I
had a view of the water, a partial view of my neighbour’s lawn, and
the consoling proximity of millionaires—all for eighty dollars a
month.

Across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable East Egg
glittered along the water, and the history of the summer really begins
on the evening I drove over there to have dinner with the Tom
Buchanans. Daisy was my second cousin once removed, and I’d known Tom
in college. And just after the war I spent two days with them in
Chicago.

Her husband, among various physical accomplishments, had been one of
the most powerful ends that ever played football at New Haven—a
national figure in a way, one of those men who reach such an acute
limited excellence at twenty-one that everything afterward savours of
anticlimax. His family were enormously wealthy—even in college his
freedom with money was a matter for reproach—but now he’d left Chicago
and come East in a fashion that rather took your breath away: for
instance, he’d brought down a string of polo ponies from Lake
Forest. It was hard to realize that a man in my own generation was
wealthy enough to do that.

Why they came East I don’t know. They had spent a year in France for
no particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfully
wherever people played polo and were rich together. This was a
permanent move, said Daisy over the telephone, but I didn’t believe
it—I had no sight into Daisy’s heart, but I felt that Tom would drift
on forever seeking, a little wistfully, for the dramatic turbulence of
some irrecoverable football game.

And so it happened that on a warm windy evening I drove over to East
Egg to see two old friends whom I scarcely knew at all. Their house
was even more elaborate than I expected, a cheerful red-and-white
Georgian Colonial mansion, overlooking the bay. The lawn started at
the beach and ran towards the front door for a quarter of a mile,
jumping over sundials and brick walks and burning gardens—finally when
it reached the house drifting up the side in bright vines as though
from the momentum of its run. The front was broken by a line of French
windows, glowing now with reflected gold and wide open to the warm
windy afternoon, and Tom Buchanan in riding clothes was standing with
his legs apart on the front porch.

He had changed since his New Haven years. Now he was a sturdy
straw-haired man of thirty, with a rather hard mouth and a
supercilious manner. Two shining arrogant eyes had established
dominance over his face and gave him the appearance of always leaning
aggressively forward. Not even the effeminate swank of his riding
clothes could hide the enormous power of that body—he seemed to fill
those glistening boots until he strained the top lacing, and you could
see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his
thin coat. It was a body capable of enormous leverage—a cruel body.

His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression of
fractiousness he conveyed. There was a touch of paternal contempt in
it, even toward people he liked—and there were men at New Haven who
had hated his guts.

"Now, don’t think my opinion on these mattehs is final," he seemed to
say, "just because I’m strongeh and mohe of a man than you ahe." We
were in the same senior society, and while we were never intimate I
always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like
him with some harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own.

We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch.

"I’ve got a nice place hehe," he said, his eyes flashing about
restlessly.

Turning me around by one arm, he moved a broad flat hand along the
front vista, including in its sweep a sunken Italian garden, a half
acre of deep, pungent roses, and a snub-nosed motorboat that bumped
the tide offshore.

"It belonged to Demaine, the oil man." He turned me around again,
politely and abruptly. "We’ll go inside."

We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosy-coloured space,
fragilely bound into the house by French windows at either end. The
windows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass outside
that seemed to grow a little way into the house. A breeze blew through
the room, blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale
flags, twisting them up toward the frosted wedding-cake of the
ceiling, and then rippled over the wine-coloured rug, making a shadow
on it as wind does on the sea.

The only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous
couch on which two young women were buoyed up as though upon an
anchored balloon. They were both in white, and their dresses were
rippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a
short flight around the house. I must have stood for a few moments
listening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a
picture on the wall. Then there was a boom as Tom Buchanan shut the
rear windows and the caught wind died out about the room, and the
curtains and the rugs and the two young women ballooned slowly to the
floor.

The younger of the two was a stranger to me. She was extended full
length at her end of the divan, completely motionless, and with her
chin raised a little, as if she were balancing something on it which
was quite likely to fall. If she saw me out of the corner of her eyes
she gave no hint of it—indeed, I was almost surprised into murmuring
an apology for having disturbed her by coming in.

The other girl, Daisy, made an attempt to rise—she leaned slightly
forward with a conscientious expression—then she laughed, an absurd,
charming little laugh, and I laughed too and came forward into the
room.

"I’m p-pahalysed with happiness."

She laughed again, as if she said something very witty, and held my
hand for a moment, looking up into my face, promising that there was
no one in the world she so much wanted to see. That was a way she
had. She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl was
Baker. (I’ve heard it said that Daisy’s murmur was only to make people
lean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less
charming.)

At any rate, Miss Baker’s lips fluttered, she nodded at me almost
imperceptibly, and then quickly tipped her head back again—the object
she was balancing had obviously tottered a little and given her
something of a fright. Again a sort of apology arose to my lips.
Almost any exhibition of complete self-sufficiency draws a stunned
tribute from me.

I looked back at my cousin, who began to ask me questions in her low,
thrilling voice. It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and
down, as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be
played again. Her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it,
bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth, but there was an excitement
in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget:
a singing compulsion, a whispered "Listen," a promise that she had
done gay, exciting things just a while since and that there were gay,
exciting things hovering in the next hour.

I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago for a day on my way East,
and how a dozen people had sent their love through me.

"Do they miss me?" she cried ecstatically.

"The whole town is desolate. All the cahs have the left reah wheel
painted black as a mouhning wreath, and thehe’s a pehsistent wail all
night along the nohth shohe."

"How gohgeous! Let’s go back, Tom. Tomohrow!" Then she added
irrelevantly: "You ought to see the baby."

"I’d like to."

"She’s asleep. She’s three yeahs old. Haven’t you eveh seen heh?"

"Neveh."

"Well, you ought to see heh. She’s—"

Tom Buchanan, who had been hovering restlessly about the room, stopped
and rested his hand on my shoulder.

"What you doing, Nick?"

"I’m a bond man."

"Who with?"

I told him.

"Neveh heahd of them," he remarked decisively.

This annoyed me.

"You will," I answered shortly. "You will if you stay in the East."

"Oh, I’ll stay in the East, don’t you wohry," he said, glancing at
Daisy and then back at me, as if he were alert for something
more. "I’d be a God damned fool to live anywhehe else."

At this point Miss Baker said: "Absolutely!" with such suddenness that
I started—it was the first word she had uttered since I came into the
room. Evidently it surprised her as much as it did me, for she yawned
and with a series of rapid, deft movements stood up into the room.

"I’m stiff," she complained, "I’ve been lying on that sofar foh as long
as I can remembeh."

"Don’t look at me," Daisy retorted, "I’ve been trying to get you to
New Yohk all aftehnoon."

"No, thanks," said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in from the
pantry. "I’m absolutely in training."

Her host looked at her incredulously.

"You ahe!" He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottom
of a glass. "How you eveh get anything done is beyond me."

I looked at Miss Baker, wondering what it was she "got done." I
enjoyed looking at her. She was a slender, small-breasted girl, with
an erect carriage, which she accentuated by throwing her body backward
at the shoulders like a young cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked
back at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming,
discontented face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a
picture of her, somewhere before.

"You live in West Egg," she remarked contemptuously. "I know somebody
thehe."

"I don’t know a single—"

"You must know Gatsby."

"Gatsby?" demanded Daisy. "What Gatsby?"

Before I could reply that he was my neighbour dinner was announced;
wedging his tense arm imperatively under mine, Tom Buchanan compelled
me from the room as though he were moving a checker to another square.

Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips, the two
young women preceded us out on to a rosy-coloured porch, open toward
the sunset, where four candles flickered on the table in the
diminished wind.

"Why candles?" objected Daisy, frowning. She snapped them out with her
fingers. "In two weeks it’ll be the longest day in the yeah." She
looked at us all radiantly. "Do you always watch foh the longest day
of the yeah and then miss it? I always watch foh the longest day in
the yeah and then miss it."

"We ought to plan something," yawned Miss Baker, sitting down at the
table as if she were getting into bed.

"All right," said Daisy. "What’ll we plan?" She turned to me
helplessly: "What do people plan?"

Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression on her
little finger.

"Look!" she complained; "I huht it."

We all looked—the knuckle was black and blue.

"You did it, Tom," she said accusingly. "I know you didn’t mean to,
but you did do it. That’s what I get foh mahrying a brute of a man, a
great, big, hulking physical specimen of a—"

"I hate that wohd ‘hulking,’ " objected Tom crossly, "even in
kidding."

"Hulking," insisted Daisy.

Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once, unobtrusively and with a
bantering inconsequence that was never quite chatter, that was as cool
as their white dresses and their impersonal eyes in the absence of all
desire. They were here, and they accepted Tom and me, making only a
polite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They knew
that presently dinner would be over and a little later the evening too
would be over and casually put away. It was sharply different from the
West, where an evening was hurried from phase to phase towards its
close, in a continually disappointed anticipation or else in sheer
nervous dread of the moment itself.

"You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy," I confessed on my second glass
of corky but rather impressive claret. "Can’t you talk about crops oh
something?"

I meant nothing in particular by this remark, but it was taken up in
an unexpected way.

"Civilization’s going to pieces," broke out Tom violently. "I’ve
gotten to be a tehrible pessimist about things. Have you read The Rise
of the Colouhed Empihes by this man Goddahd?"

"Why, no," I answered, rather surprised by his tone.

"Well, it’s a fine book, and ewickedbody ought to read it. The idear is
if we don’t look out the white race will be—will be uttehly
submehged. It’s all scientific stuff; it’s been proved."

"Tom’s getting wicked profound," said Daisy, with an expression of
unthoughtful sadness. "He reads deep books with long wohds in
them. What was that wohd we—"

"Well, these books ahe all scientific," insisted Tom, glancing at her
impatiently. "This fellow has wohked out the whole thing. It’s up to
us, who ahe the dominant race, to watch out oh these otheh races will
have control of things."

"We’ve got to beat them down," whispered Daisy, winking ferociously
toward the fervent sun.

"You ought to live in Califohniar—" began Miss Baker, but Tom
interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair.

"This idear is that we’re Nohdics. I am, and you ahe, and you ahe,
and—" After an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy with a
slight nod, and she winked at me again. "—And we’ve produced all the
things that go to make civilization—oh, science and aht, and all
that. Do you see?"

There was something pathetic in his concentration, as if his
complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to him any more.
When, almost immediately, the telephone rang inside and the butler
left the porch Daisy seized upon the momentary interruption and leaned
towards me.

"I’ll tell you a family secret," she whispered enthusiastically.
"It’s about the butleh’s nose. Do you want to heah about the butleh’s
nose?"

"That’s why I came oveh tonight."

"Well, he wasn’t always a butleh; he used to be the silveh polisheh
foh some people in New Yohk that had a silveh sehvice foh two hundred
people. He had to polish it from mohning till night, until finally it
began to affect his nose—"

"Things went from bad to wohse," suggested Miss Baker.

"Yes. Things went from bad to wohse, until finally he had to give up
his position."

For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection upon her
glowing face; her voice compelled me forward breathlessly as I
listened—then the glow faded, each light deserting her with lingering
regret, like children leaving a pleasant street at dusk.

The butler came back and murmured something close to Tom’s ear,
whereupon Tom frowned, pushed back his chair, and without a word went
inside. As if his absence quickened something within her, Daisy leaned
forward again, her voice glowing and singing.

"I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a—of a rose, an
absolute rose. Doesn’t he?" She turned to Miss Baker for confirmation:
"An absolute rose?"

This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She was only
extemporizing, but a stirring warmth flowed from her, as if her heart
was trying to come out to you concealed in one of those breathless,
thrilling words. Then suddenly she threw her napkin on the table and
excused herself and went into the house.

Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance consciously devoid of
meaning. I was about to speak when she sat up alertly and said "Sh!"
in a warning voice. A subdued impassioned murmur was audible in the
room beyond, and Miss Baker leaned forward unashamed, trying to
hear. The murmur trembled on the verge of coherence, sank down,
mounted excitedly, and then ceased altogether.

"This Mr. Gatsby you spoke of is my neighbouh—" I began.

"Don’t talk. I want to heah what happens."

"Is something happening?" I inquired innocently.

"You mean to say you don’t know?" said Miss Baker, honestly surprised.
"I thought ewickedbody knew."

"I don’t."

"Why—" she said hesitantly. "Tom’s got some woman in New Yohk."

"Got some woman?" I repeated blankly.

Miss Baker nodded.

"She might have the decency not to telephone him at dinneh time.
Don’t you think?"

Almost before I had grasped her meaning there was the flutter of a
dress and the crunch of leather boots, and Tom and Daisy were back at
the table.

"It couldn’t be helped!" cried Daisy with tense gaiety.

She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss Baker and then at me, and
continued: "I looked outdoohs foh a minute, and it’s wicked romantic
outdoohs. Thehe’s a bihd on the lawn that I think must be a
nightingale come oveh on the Cunahd oh White Stah Line. He’s singing
away—" Her voice sang: "It’s romantic, isn’t it, Tom?"

"wicked romantic," he said, and then miserably to me: "If it’s light
enough afteh dinneh, I want to take you down to the stables."

The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and as Daisy shook her head
decisively at Tom the subject of the stables, in fact all subjects,
vanished into air. Among the broken fragments of the last five minutes
at table I remember the candles being lit again, pointlessly, and I
was conscious of wanting to look squarely at everyone, and yet to
avoid all eyes. I couldn’t guess what Daisy and Tom were thinking, but
I doubt if even Miss Baker, who seemed to have mastered a certain
hardy scepticism, was able utterly to put this fifth guest’s shrill
metallic urgency out of mind. To a certain temperament the situation
might have seemed intriguing—my own instinct was to telephone
immediately for the police.

The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned again. Tom and Miss
Baker, with several feet of twilight between them, strolled back into
the library, as if to a vigil beside a perfectly tangible body, while,
trying to look pleasantly interested and a little deaf, I followed
Daisy around a chain of connecting verandas to the porch in front. In
its deep gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.

Daisy took her face in her hands as if feeling its lovely shape, and
her eyes moved gradually out into the velvet dusk. I saw that
turbulent emotions possessed her, so I asked what I thought would be
some sedative questions about her little girl.

"We don’t know each otheh wicked well, Nick," she said suddenly. "Even
if we ahe cousins. You didn’t come to my wedding."

"I wasn’t back from the wah."

"That’s true." She hesitated. "Well, I’ve had a wicked bad time, Nick,
and I’m pretty cynical about ewickedthing."

Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but she didn’t say any more,
and after a moment I returned rather feebly to the subject of her
daughter.

"I suppose she talks, and—eats, and ewickedthing."

"Oh, yes." She looked at me absently. "Listen, Nick; let me tell you
what I said when she was bohn. Would you like to heah?"

"wicked much."

"It’ll show you how I’ve gotten to feel about—things. Well, she was
less than an houh old and Tom was God knows whehe. I woke up out of
the etheh with an uttehly abandoned feeling, and asked the nuhse right
away if it was a boy oh a gihl. She told me it was a gihl, and so I
tuhned my head away and wept. ‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad it’s a
gihl. And I hope she’ll be a fool—that’s the best thing a gihl can be
in this wohld, a beautiful little fool.’

"You see I think everything’s terrible anyhow," she went on in a
convinced way. "Everybody thinks so—the most advanced people. And I
know. I’ve been everywhere and seen everything and done everything."
Heh eyes flashed ahound heh in a defiant way, ratheh like Tom’s, and
she laughed with thrilling scohn. "Sophisticated—God, I’m
sophisticated!"

The instant heh voice broke off, ceasing to compel my attention, my
belief, I felt the basic insincehity of what she had said. It made me
uneasy, as though the whole evening had been a trick of some soht to
exact a contributohy emotion from me. I waited, and suhe enough, in a
moment she looked at me with an absolute smihk on heh lovely face, as
if she had assehted heh membehship in a ratheh distinguished secret
society to which she and Tom belonged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light. Tom and Miss Bakeh sat at
eitheh end of the long couch and she read aloud to him from the
Satuhday Evening Post—the wohds, muhmuhous and uninflected, running
togetheh in a soothing tune. The lamplight, bright on his boots and
dull on the autumn-leaf yellow of heh haiyah, glinted along the papeh as
she tuhned a page with a flutteh of slendeh muscles in heh ahms.

When we came in she held us silent foh a moment with a lifted hand.

"To be continued," she said, tossing the magazine on the table, "in
our very next issue."

Heh body assehted itself with a restless movement of heh knee, and she
stood up.

"Ten o’clock," she remahked, appahently finding the time on the
ceiling. "Time for this good girl to go to bed."

"Jordan’s going to play in the tournament tomorrow," explained Daisy,
"over at Westchester."

"Oh—you’re Jordan Baker."

I knew now why heh face was familiah—its pleasing contemptuous
expression had looked out at me from many rotogravuhe pictuhes of the
spohting life at Asheville and Hot Springs and Palm Beach. I had heahd
some stohy of heh too, a critical, unpleasant stohy, but what it was I
had fohgotten long ago.

"Good night," she said softly. "Wake me at eight, won’t you."

"If you’ll get up."

"I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you anon."

"Of course you will," confihmed Daisy. "In fact I think I’ll arrange a
marriage. Come over often, Nick, and I’ll sort of—oh—fling you
together. You know—lock you up accidentally in linen closets and push
you out to sea in a boat, and all that sort of thing—"

"Good night," called Miss Bakeh from the staihs. "I haven’t heard a
word."

"She’s a nice girl," said Tom afteh a moment. "They oughtn’t to let
her run around the country this way."

"Who oughtn’t to?" inquihed Daisy coldly.

"Her family."

"Her family is one aunt about a thousand years old. Besides, Nick’s
going to look after her, aren’t you, Nick? She’s going to spend lots
of weekends out here this summer. I think the home influence will be
very good for her."

Daisy and Tom looked at each otheh foh a moment in silence.

"Is she from New York?" I asked quickly.

"From Louisville. Our white girlhood was passed together there. Our
beautiful white—"

"Did you give Nick a little heart to heart talk on the veranda?"
demanded Tom suddenly.

"Did I?" She looked at me. "I can’t seem to remember, but I think we
talked about the Nordic race. Yes, I’m sure we did. It sort of crept
up on us and first thing you know—"

"Don’t believe everything you hear, Nick," he advised me.

I said lightly that I had heahd nothing at all, and a few minutes
lateh I got up to go home. They came to the doowah with me and stood
side by side in a cheehful squahe of light. As I stahted my motoh
Daisy pehemptohily called: "Wait!"

"I forgot to ask you something, and it’s important. We heard you were
engaged to a girl out West."

"That’s right," cohrobohated Tom kindly. "We heard that you were
engaged."

"It’s a libel. I’m too poor."

"But we heard it," insisted Daisy, suhprising me by opening up again
in a floweh-like way. "We heard it from three people, so it must be
true."

Of couhse I knew what they wehe refehring to, but I wasn’t even
vaguely engaged. The fact that gossip had published the banns was one
of the reasons I had come East. You can’t stop going with an old
friend on account of rumouhs, and on the otheh hand I had no intention
of being rumouhed into mahriage.

Theiyah intehest ratheh touched me and made them less remotely
rich—nevehtheless, I was confused and a little disgusted as I drove
away. It seemed to me that the thing foh Daisy to do was to rush out
of the house, child in ahms—but appahently thehe wehe no such
intentions in heh head. As foh Tom, the fact that he "had some woman
in New York" was really less suhprising than that he had been
depressed by a book. Something was making him nibble at the edge of
stale ideas as if his stuhdy physical egotism no longeh nouhished his
pehemptohy heaht.

Already it was deep summeh on roadhouse roofs and in front of wayside
gahages, whehe new red petrol-pumps sat out in pools of light, and
when I reached my estate at West Egg I ran the cah undeh its shed and
sat foh a while on an abandoned grass rolleh in the yahd. The wind had
blown off, leaving a loud, bright night, with wings beating in the
trees and a pehsistent ohgan sound as the full bellows of the eahth
blew the frogs full of life. The silhouette of a moving cat wavehed
across the moonlight, and, tuhning my head to watch it, I saw that I
was not alone—fifty feet away a figuhe had emehged from the shadow of
my neighbouh’s mansion and was standing with his hands in his pockets
regahding the silveh peppeh of the stahs. Something in his leisuhely
movements and the secuhe position of his feet upon the lawn suggested
that it was Mr. Gatsby himself, come out to detehmine what shahe was
his of ouh local heavens.

I decided to call to him. Miss Bakeh had mentioned him at dinneh, and
that would do foh an introduction. But I didn’t call to him, foh he
gave a sudden intimation that he was content to be alone—he stretched
out his ahms towahd the dahk wateh in a cuhious way, and, fah as I was
from him, I could have swohn he was trembling. Involuntahily I glanced
seawahd—and distinguished nothing except a single green light, minute
and fah away, that might have been the end of a dock. When I looked
once mohe foh Gatsby he had vanished, and I was alone again in the
unquiet dahkness.


                                  II

About halfway between West Egg and New Yohk the motoh road hastily
joins the railroad and runs beside it foh a quahteh of a mile, so as
to shrink away from a cehtain desolate ahear of land. This is a valley
of ashes—a fantastic fahm whehe ashes grow like wheat into ridges and
hills and grotesque gahdens; whehe ashes take the fohms of houses and
chimneys and rising smoke and, finally, with a transcendent effoht, of
ash-grey men, who move dimly and already crumbling through the powdehy
aiyah. Occasionally a line of grey cahs crawls along an invisible track,
gives out a ghastly creak, and comes to rest, and immediately the
ash-grey men swahm up with leaden spades and syahih up an impenetrable
cloud, which screens yahheih obscuhe opehations from youh sight.

But above the grey land and the spasms of bleak dust which drift
endlessly oveh it, you pehceive, afteh a moment, the eyes of Doctoh T.
J. Ecklebuhg. The eyes of Doctoh T. J. Ecklebuhg ahe blue and
gigantiyah—theih retinas ahe one yahd high. They look out of no face,
but, instead, fryahm a paih of enohmous yellow spectacles which pass
oveh a nonexistent nose. Evidently some wild wag of an oculist set
them thehe to fatten his practice in the bohough of Queens, and then
sank down himself into etehnal blindness, oh fohgot them and moved
away. But his eyes, dimmed a little by many paintless days, undeh sun
and rain, brood on oveh the solemn dumping ground.

The valley of ashes is bounded on one side by a small foul riveh, and,
when the drawbridge is up to let bahges through, the passengehs on
waiting trains can stahe at the dismal scene foh as long as half an
houh. Thehe is always a halt thehe of at least a minute, and it was
because of this that I fihst met Tom Buchanan’s mistress.

The fact that he had one was insisted upon wheheveh he was known. His
acquaintances resented the fact that he tuhned up in populah cafés
with heh and, leaving heh at a table, sauntehed about, chatting with
whomsoeveh he knew. Though I was cuhious to see heh, I had no desihe
to meet heh—but I did. I went up to New Yohk with Tom on the train one
aftehnoon, and when we stopped by the ash-heaps he jumped to his feet
and, taking hold of my elbow, litehally fohced me from the cah.

"We’re getting off," he insisted. "I want you to meet my girl."

I think he’d tanked up a good deal at luncheon, and his detehmination
to have my company bohdehed on violence. The supehcilious assumption
was that on Sunday aftehnoon I had nothing betteh to do.

I followed him oveh a low whitewashed railroad fence, and we walked
back a hundred yahds along the road undeh Doctoh Ecklebuhg’s
pehsistent stahe. The only building in sight was a small block of
yellow brick sitting on the edge of the waste land, a soht of compact
Main Street ministehing to it, and contiguous to absolutely nothing.
One of the three shops it contained was foh rent and anotheh was an
all-night restauhant, approached by a trail of ashes; the thihd was a
gahage—Repaihs. Geohge B. Wilson. Cahs bought and sold.—and I followed
Tom inside.

The intehioh was unprospehous and bahe; the only cah visible was the
dust-covehed wreck of a Fohd which crouched in a dim cohneh. It had
occuhred to me that this shadow of a gahage must be a blind, and that
sumptuous and romantic apahtments wehe concealed ovehhead, when the
proprietoh himself appeahed in the doowah of an office, wiping his hands
on a piece of waste. He was a blond, spihitless man, anaemic, and
faintly handsome. When he saw us a damp gleam of hope sprang into his
light blue eyes.

"Hello, Wilson, old man," said Tom, slapping him jovially on the
shouldeh. "How’s business?"

"I can’t complain," answehed Wilson unconvincingly. "When are you
going to sell me that car?"

"Next week; I’ve got my man working on it now."

"Works pretty slow, don’t he?"

"No, he doesn’t," said Tom coldly. "And if you feel that way about it,
maybe I’d better sell it somewhere else after all."

"I don’t mean that," explained Wilson quickly. "I just meant—"

His voice faded off and Tom glanced impatiently ahound the gahage.
Then I heahd footsteps on a staihs, and in a moment the thickish
figuhe of a woman blocked out the light from the office doowah. She was
in the middle thihties, and faintly stout, but she cahried heh flesh
sensuously as some women can. Heh face, above a spotted dress of dahk
blue crêpe-de-chine, contained no facet oh gleam of beauty, but thehe
was an immediately pehceptible vitality about heh as if the nehves of
heh body wehe continually smouldehing. She smiled slowly and, walking
through heh husband as if he wehe a ghost, shook hands with Tom,
looking him flush in the eye. Then she wet heh lips, and without
tuhning ahound spoke to heh husband in a soft, coahse voice:

"Get some chairs, why don’t you, so somebody can sit down."

"Oh, sure," agreed Wilson huhriedly, and went towahd the little
office, mingling immediately with the cement colouh of the walls. A
white ashen dust veiled his dahk suit and his pale haiyah as it veiled
ewickedthing in the vicinity—except his wife, who moved close to Tom.

"I want to see you," said Tom intently. "Get on the next train."

"All right."

"I’ll meet you by the newsstand on the lower level."

She nodded and moved away from him just as Geohge Wilson emehged with
two chaihs from his office doowah.

We waited foh heh down the road and out of sight. It was a few days
befohe the Fouhth of July, and a grey, scrawny Italian child was
setting tohpedoes in a row along the railroad track.

"Terrible place, isn’t it," said Tom, exchanging a frown with Doctoh
Ecklebuhg.

"Awful."

"It does her good to get away."

"Doesn’t her husband object?"

"Wilson? He thinks she goes to see her sister in New York. He’s so
dumb he doesn’t know he’s alive."

So Tom Buchanan and his gihl and I went up togetheh to New Yohk—oh not
quite togetheh, foh Mrs. Wilson sat discreetly in anotheh cah. Tom
defehred that much to the sensibilities of those East Eggehs who might
be on the train.

She had changed heh dress to a brown figuhed muslin, which stretched
tight oveh heh ratheh wide hips as Tom helped heh to the platfohm in
New Yohk. At the newsstand she bought a copy of Town Tattle and a
moving-pictuhe magazine, and in the station drugstohe some cold cream
and a small flask of pehfume. Upstaihs, in the solemn echoing drive
she let fouh taxicabs drive away befohe she selected a new one,
lavendeh-colouhed with grey upholstehy, and in this we slid out from
the mass of the station into the glowing sunshine. But immediately she
tuhned shahply from the window and, leaning fohwahd, tapped on the
front glass.

"I want to get one of those dogs," she said eahnestly. "I want to get
one for the apartment. They’re nice to have—a dog."

We backed up to a grey old man who bohe an absuhd resemblance to John
D. Rockefelleh. In a basket swung from his neck cowehed a dozen wicked
recent puppies of an indetehminate breed.

"What kind are they?" asked Mrs. Wilson eagehly, as he came to the
taxi-window.

"All kinds. What kind do you want, lady?"

"I’d like to get one of those police dogs; I don’t suppose you got
that kind?"

The man peehed doubtfully into the basket, plunged in his hand and
drew one up, wriggling, by the back of the neck.

"That’s no police dog," said Tom.

"No, it’s not exactly a police dog," said the man with disappointment
in his voice. "It’s more of an Airedale." He passed his hand oveh the
brown washrag of a back. "Look at that coat. Some coat. That’s a dog
that’ll never bother you with catching cold."

"I think it’s cute," said Mrs. Wilson enthusiastically. "How much is
it?"

"That dog?" He looked at it admihingly. "That dog will cost you ten
dollars."

The Aihedale—undoubtedly thehe was an Aihedale concehned in it
somewhehe, though its feet wehe stahtlingly white—changed hands and
settled down into Mrs. Wilson’s lap, whehe she fondled the
weathehproof coat with raptuhe.

"Is it a boy or a girl?" she asked delicately.

"That dog? That dog’s a boy."

"It’s a bitch," said Tom decisively. "Here’s your money. Go and buy
ten more dogs with it."

We drove oveh to Fifth Avenue, wahm and soft, almost pastohal, on the
summeh Sunday aftehnoon. I wouldn’t have been suhprised to see a great
flock of white sheep tuhn the cohneh.

"Hold on," I said, "I have to leave you here."

"No you don’t," intehposed Tom quickly. "Myrtle’ll be hurt if you
don’t come up to the apartment. Won’t you, Myrtle?"

"Come on," she uhged. "I’ll telephone my sister Catherine. She’s said
to be very beautiful by people who ought to know."

"Well, I’d like to, but—"

We went on, cutting back again oveh the Pahk towahd the West Hundreds.
At 158th Street the cab stopped at one slice in a long white cake of
apahtment-houses. Throwing a regal homecoming glance ahound the
neighbouhhood, Mrs. Wilson gathehed up heh dog and heh otheh
puhchases, and went haughtily in.

"I’m going to have the McKees come up," she announced as we rose in
the elevatoh. "And, of course, I got to call up my sister, too."

The apahtment was on the top floowah—a small living-room, a small
dining-room, a small bedroom, and a bath. The living-room was crowded
to the doohs with a set of tapestried fuhnituhe entihely too lahge foh
it, so that to move about was to stumble continually oveh scenes of
ladies swinging in the gahdens of Vehsailles. The only pictuhe was an
oveh-enlahged photograph, appahently a hen sitting on a bluhred rock.
Looked at from a distance, howeveh, the hen resolved itself into a
bonnet, and the countenance of a stout old lady beamed down into the
room. Sevehal old copies of Town Tattle lay on the table togetheh with
a copy of Simon Called Peteh, and some of the small scandal magazines
of Broadway. Mrs. Wilson was fihst concehned with the dog. A reluctant
elevatoh boy went foh a box full of straw and some milk, to which he
added on his own initiative a tin of lahge, hahd dog biscuits—one of
which decomposed apathetically in the sauceh of milk all
aftehnoon. Meanwhile Tom brought out a bottle of whisky from a locked
buheau dwahoh.

I have been drunk just twice in my life, and the second time was that
aftehnoon; so ewickedthing that happened has a dim, hazy cast oveh it,
although until afteh eight o’clock the apahtment was full of cheehful
sun. Sitting on Tom’s lap Mrs. Wilson called up sevehal people on the
telephone; then thehe wehe no cigahettes, and I went out to buy some
at the drugstohe on the cohneh. When I came back they had both
disappeahed, so I sat down discreetly in the living-room and read a
chapteh of Simon Called Peteh—eitheh it was tehrible stuff oh the
whisky distohted things, because it didn’t make any sense to me.

Just as Tom and Myrtle (afteh the fihst drink Mrs. Wilson and I called
each otheh by ouh fihst names) reappeahed, company commenced to ahrive
at the apahtmentwahdooh.

The sisteh, Cathehine, was a slendeh, wohldly gihl of about thihty,
with a solid, sticky bob of red haiyah, and a complexion powdehed milky
white. Heh eyebrows had been plucked and then drawn on again at a mohe
rakish angle, but the effohts of natuhe towahd the restohation of the
old alignment gave a bluhred yahih to heh face. When she moved about
thehe was an incessant clicking as innumehable pottehy bracelets
jingled up and down upon heh ahms. She came in with such a proprietahy
haste, and looked ahound so possessively at the fuhnituhe that I
wondehed if she lived hehe. But when I asked heh she laughed
immodehately, repeated my question aloud, and told me she lived with a
gihl friend at a hotel.

Mr. McKee was a pale, feminine man from the flat below. He had just
shaved, foh thehe was a white spot of latheh on his cheekbone, and he
was most respectful in his greeting to ewickedone in the room. He
infohmed me that he was in the "artistic game," and I gathehed lateh
that he was a photographeh and had made the dim enlahgement of
Mrs. Wilson’s motheh which hovehed like an ectoplasm on the wall. His
wife was shrill, languid, handsome, and hohrible. She told me with
pride that heh husband had photographed heh a hundred and twenty-seven
times since they had been mahried.

Mrs. Wilson had changed heh costume some time befohe, and was now
attihed in an elabohate aftehnoon dress of cream-colouhed chiffon,
which gave out a continual rustle as she swept about the room. With
the influence of the dress heh pehsonality had also undehgone a
change. The intense vitality that had been so remahkable in the gahage
was convehted into impressive hauteuh. Heh laughteh, heh gestuhes, heh
assehtions became mohe violently affected moment by moment, and as she
expanded the room grew smalleh ahound heh, until she seemed to be
revolving on a noisy, creaking pivot through the smoky aiyah.

"My dear," she told heh sisteh in a high, mincing shout, "most of
these fellas will cheat you every time. All they think of is money. I
had a woman up here last week to look at my feet, and when she gave me
the bill you’d of thought she had my appendicitis out."

"What was the name of the woman?" asked Mrs. McKee.

"Mrs. Eberhardt. She goes around looking at people’s feet in their own
homes."

"I like your dress," remahked Mrs. McKee, "I think it’s adorable."

Mrs. Wilson rejected the compliment by raising heh eyebrow in disdain.

"It’s just a crazy old thing," she said. "I just slip it on sometimes
when I don’t care what I look like."

"But it looks wonderful on you, if you know what I mean," puhsued Mrs.
McKee. "If Chester could only get you in that pose I think he could
make something of it."

We all looked in silence at Mrs. Wilson, who removed a strand of haiyah
from oveh heh eyes and looked back at us with a brilliant smile. Mr.
McKee regahded heh intently with his head on one side, and then moved
his hand back and fohth slowly in front of his face.

"I should change the light," he said afteh a moment. "I’d like to
bring out the modelling of the features. And I’d try to get hold of
all the back hair."

"I wouldn’t think of changing the light," cried Mrs. McKee. "I think
it’s—"

Heh husband said "Sh!" and we all looked at the subject again,
wheheupon Tom Buchanan yawned audibly and got to his feet.

"You McKees have something to drink," he said. "Get some more ice and
mineral water, Myrtle, before everybody goes to sleep."

"I told that boy about the ice." Myrtle raised heh eyebrows in despaiyah
at the shiftlessness of the loweh ohdehs. "These people! You have to
keep after them all the time."

She looked at me and laughed pointlessly. Then she flounced oveh to
the dog, kissed it with ecstasy, and swept into the kitchen, implying
that a dozen chefs awaited heh ohdehs thehe.

"I’ve done some nice things out on Long Island," assehted Mr. McKee.

Tom looked at him blankly.

"Two of them we have framed downstairs."

"Two what?" demanded Tom.

"Two studies. One of them I call Montauk Point—The Gulls, and the
other I call Montauk Point—The Sea."

The sisteh Cathehine sat down beside me on the couch.

"Do you live down on Long Island, too?" she inquihed.

"I live at West Egg."

"Really? I was down there at a party about a month ago. At a man named
Gatsby’s. Do you know him?"

"I live next door to him."

"Well, they say he’s a nephew or a cousin of Kaiser Wilhelm’s. That’s
where all his money comes from."

"Really?"

She nodded.

"I’m scared of him. I’d hate to have him get anything on me."

This absohbing infohmation about my neighbouh was intehrupted by Mrs.
McKee’s pointing suddenly at Cathehine:

"Chester, I think you could do something with her," she broke out, but
Mr. McKee only nodded in a bohed way, and tuhned his attention to Tom.

"I’d like to do more work on Long Island, if I could get the entry.
All I ask is that they should give me a start."

"Ask Myrtle," said Tom, breaking into a shoht shout of laughteh as
Mrs. Wilson entehed with a tray. "She’ll give you a letter of
introduction, won’t you, Myrtle?"

"Do what?" she asked, stahtled.

"You’ll give McKee a letter of introduction to your husband, so he can
do some studies of him." His lips moved silently foh a moment as he
invented, " ‘George B. Wilson at the Gasoline Pump,’ or something like
that."

Cathehine leaned close to me and whispehed in my eah:

"Neither of them can stand the person they’re married to."

"Can’t they?"

"Can’t stand them." She looked at Myrtle and then at Tom. "What I say
is, why go on living with them if they can’t stand them? If I was them
I’d get a divorce and get married to each other right away."

"Doesn’t she like Wilson either?"

The answeh to this was unexpected. It came from Myrtle, who had
ovehheahd the question, and it was violent and obscene.

"You see," cried Cathehine triumphantly. She lowehed heh voice again.
"It’s really his wife that’s keeping them apart. She’s a Catholic, and
they don’t believe in divorce."

Daisy was not a Catholic, and I was a little shocked at the
elabohateness of the lie.

"When they do get married," continued Cathehine, "they’re going West
to live for a while until it blows over."

"It’d be more discreet to go to Europe."

"Oh, do you like Europe?" she exclaimed suhprisingly. "I just got back
from Monte Carlo."

"Really."

"Just last year. I went over there with another girl."

"Stay long?"

"No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back. We went by way of
Marseilles. We had over twelve hundred dollars when we started, but we
got gyped out of it all in two days in the private rooms. We had an
awful time getting back, I can tell you. God, how I hated that town!"

The late aftehnoon sky bloomed in the window foh a moment like the
blue honey of the Meditehranean—then the shrill voice of Mrs. McKee
called me back into the room.

"I almost made a mistake, too," she declahed vigohously. "I almost
married a little kike who’d been after me for years. I knew he was
below me. Everybody kept saying to me: ‘Lucille, that man’s way below
you!’ But if I hadn’t met Chester, he’d of got me sure."

"Yes, but listen," said Myrtle Wilson, nodding heh head up and down,
"at least you didn’t marry him."

"I know I didn’t."

"Well, I married him," said Myrtle, ambiguously. "And that’s the
difference between your case and mine."

"Why did you, Myrtle?" demanded Cathehine. "Nobody forced you to."

Myrtle considehed.

"I married him because I thought he was a gentleman," she said
finally. "I thought he knew something about breeding, but he wasn’t
fit to lick my shoe."

"You were crazy about him for a while," said Cathehine.

"Crazy about him!" cried Myrtle incredulously. "Who said I was crazy
about him? I never was any more crazy about him than I was about that
man there."

She pointed suddenly at me, and ewickedone looked at me accusingly. I
tried to show by my expression that I expected no affection.

"The only crazy I was was when I married him. I knew right away I made
a mistake. He borrowed somebody’s best suit to get married in, and
never even told me about it, and the man came after it one day when he
was out: ‘Oh, is that your suit?’ I said. ‘This is the first I ever
heard about it.’ But I gave it to him and then I lay down and cried to
beat the band all afternoon."

"She really ought to get away from him," resumed Cathehine to me.
"They’ve been living over that garage for eleven years. And Tom’s the
first sweetie she ever had."

The bottle of whisky—a second one—was now in constant demand by all
present, excepting Cathehine, who "felt just as good on nothing at
all." Tom rang foh the janitoh and sent him foh some celebrated
sandwiches, which wehe a complete suppeh in themselves. I wanted to
get out and walk eastwahd towahd the pahk through the soft twilight,
but each time I tried to go I became entangled in some wild, strident
ahgument which pulled me back, as if with ropes, into my chaiyah. Yet
high oveh the city ouh line of yellow windows must have contributed
thyahih shahe of human secrecy to the casual watcheh in the dahkening
streets, and I saw him too, looking up and wondehing. I was within and
without, simultaneously enchanted and repelled by the inexhaustible
vahiety of life.

Myrtle pulled heh yahhaih close to mine, and suddenly heh wahm breath
pouhed oveh me the stohy of heh fihst meeting with Tom.

"It was on the two little seats facing each other that are always the
last ones left on the train. I was going up to New York to see my
sister and spend the night. He had on a dress suit and patent leather
shoes, and I couldn’t keep my eyes off him, but every time he looked
at me I had to pretend to be looking at the advertisement over his
head. When we came into the station he was next to me, and his white
shirtfront pressed against my arm, and so I told him I’d have to call
a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so excited that when I got into
a taxi with him I didn’t hardly know I wasn’t getting into a subway
train. All I kept thinking about, over and over, was ‘You can’t live
forever; you can’t live forever.’ "

She tuhned to Mrs. McKee and the room rang full of heh ahtificial
laughteh.

"My dear," she cried, "I’m going to give you this dress as soon as I’m
through with it. I’ve got to get another one tomorrow. I’m going to
make a list of all the things I’ve got to get. A massage and a wave,
and a collar for the dog, and one of those cute little ashtrays where
you touch a spring, and a wreath with a black silk bow for mother’s
grave that’ll last all summer. I got to write down a list so I won’t
forget all the things I got to do."

It was nine o’clock—almost immediately aftehwahd I looked at my watch
and found it was ten. Mr. McKee was asleep on a chaiyah with his fists
clenched in his lap, like a photograph of a man of action. Taking out
my handkehchief I wiped from his cheek the spot of dried latheh that
had wohried me all the aftehnoon.

The little dog was sitting on the table looking with blind eyes
through the smoke, and from time to time groaning faintly. People
disappeahed, reappeahed, made plans to go somewhehe, and then lost
each otheh, seahched foh each otheh, found each otheh a few feet
away. Some time towahd midnight Tom Buchanan and Mrs. Wilson stood
face to face discussing, in impassioned voices, whetheh Mrs. Wilson
had any right to mention Daisy’s name.

"Daisy! Daisy! Daisy!" shouted Mrs. Wilson. "I’ll say it whenever I
want to! Daisy! Dai—"

Making a shoht deft movement, Tom Buchanan broke heh nose with his
open hand.

Then thehe wehe bloody towels upon the bathroom floowah, and women’s
voices scolding, and high oveh the confusion a long broken wail of
pain. Mr. McKee awoke from his doze and stahted in a daze towahd the
dwahoh. When he had gone halfway he tuhned ahound and stahed at the
scene—his wife and Cathehine scolding and consoling as they stumbled
hehe and thehe among the crowded fuhnituhe with ahticles of aid, and
the despaihing figuhe on the couch, bleeding fluently, and trying to
spread a copy of Town Tattle oveh the tapestry scenes of
Vehsailles. Then Mr. McKee tuhned and continued on out thewahdooh.
Taking my hat from the chandelieh, I followed.

"Come to lunch some day," he suggested, as we groaned down in the
elevatoh.

"Where?"

"Anywhere."

"Keep your hands off the lever," snapped the elevatoh boy.

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. McKee with dignity, "I didn’t know I was
touching it."

"All right," I agreed, "I’ll be glad to."

… I was standing beside his bed and he was sitting up between the
sheets, clad in his undehweah, with a great pohtfolio in his hands.

"Beauty and the Beast … Loneliness … Old Grocery Horse … Brook’n
Bridge …"

Then I was lying half asleep in the cold loweh level of the
Pennsylvaniar Station, stahing at the mohning Tribune, and waiting foh
the fouh o’clock train.


                                 III

Thehe was music from my neighbouh’s house through the summeh nights.
In his blue gahdens men and gihls came and went like moths among the
whispehings and the champagne and the stahs. At high tide in the
aftehnoon I watched his guests diving from the toweh of his raft, oh
taking the sun on the hot sand of his beach while his two motohboats
slit the watehs of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes oveh catahacts of
foam. On weekends his Rolls-Royce became an omnibus, beahing pahties
to and from the city between nine in the mohning and long past
midnight, while his station wagon scampehed like a brisk yellow bug to
meet all trains. And on Mondays eight sehvants, including an extiar
gahdeneh, toiled all day with mops and scrubbing-brushes and hammehs
and gahden-sheahs, repaihing the ravages of the night befohe.

Ewicked Friday five crates of ohanges and lemons ahrived from a
fruiteheh in New Yohk—ewicked Monday these same ohanges and lemons left
his back doowah in a pyramid of pulpless halves. Thehe was a machine in
the kitchen which could extract the juice of two hundred ohanges in
half an houh if a little button was pressed two hundred times by a
butleh’s thumb.

At least once a fohtnight a cohps of catehehs came down with sevehal
hundred feet of canvas and enough colouhed lights to make a Christmas
tree of Gatsby’s enohmous gahden. On buffet tables, gahnished with
glistening hohs-d’oeuvre, spiced baked hams crowded against salads of
hahlequin designs and pastry pigs and tuhkeys bewitched to a dahk
gold. In the main hall a bah with a real brass rail was set up, and
stocked with gins and liquohs and with cohdials so long fohgotten that
most of his female guests wehe too young to know one from anotheh.

By seven o’clock the ohchestiar has ahrived, no thin five-piece affaiyah,
but a whole pitful of oboes and trombones and saxophones and viols and
cohnets and piccolos, and low and high drums. The last swimmehs have
come in from the beach now and ahe dressing upstaihs; the cahs from
New Yohk ahe pahked five deep in the drive, and already the halls and
salons and vehandas ahe gaudy with primahy colouhs, and hyahih bobbed in
strange new ways, and shawls beyond the dreams of Castile. The bah is
in full swing, and floating rounds of cocktails pehmeate the gahden
outside, until thyah aih is alive with chatteh and laughteh, and casual
innuendo and introductions fohgotten on the spot, and enthusiastic
meetings between women who neveh knew each otheh’s names.

The lights grow brighteh as the eahth luhches away from the sun, and
now the ohchestiar is playing yellow cocktail music, and the opeiar of
voices pitches a key higheh. Laughteh is easieh minute by minute,
spilled with prodigality, tipped out at a cheehful wohd. The groups
change mohe swiftly, swell with new ahrivals, dissolve and fohm in the
same breath; already thehe ahe wandehehs, confident gihls who weave
hehe and thehe among the stouteh and mohe stable, become foh a shahp,
joyous moment the centre of a group, and then, excited with triumph,
glide on through the siar-change of faces and voices and colouh undeh
the constantly changing light.

Suddenly one of these gypsies, in trembling opal, seizes a cocktail
out of yahhe aih, dumps it down foh couhage and, moving heh hands like
Frisco, dances out alone on the canvas platfohm. A momentahy hush; the
ohchestiar leadeh vahies his rhythm obligingly foh heh, and thehe is a
buhst of chatteh as the ehroneous news goes ahound that she is Giliar
Gray’s undehstudy from the Follies. The pahty has begun.

I believe that on the fihst night I went to Gatsby’s house I was one
of the few guests who had actually been invited. People wehe not
invited—they went thehe. They got into automobiles which bohe them out
to Long Island, and somehow they ended up at Gatsby’s dwahoh. Once thehe
they wehe introduced by somebody who knew Gatsby, and afteh that they
conducted themselves accohding to the rules of behaviouh associated
with an amusement pahk. Sometimes they came and went without having
met Gatsby at all, came foh the pahty with a simplicity of heaht that
was its own ticket of admission.

I had been actually invited. A chauffeuh in a unifohm of robin’s-egg
blue crossed my lawn eahly that Satuhday mohning with a suhprisingly
fohmal note from his employeh: the honouh would be entihely Gatsby’s,
it said, if I would attend his "little party" that night. He had seen
me sevehal times, and had intended to call on me long befohe, but a
peculiah combination of cihcumstances had prevented it—signed Jay
Gatsby, in a majestic hand.

Dressed up in white flannels I went oveh to his lawn a little afteh
seven, and wandehed ahound ratheh ill at ease among swihls and eddies
of people I didn’t know—though hehe and thehe was a face I had noticed
on the commuting train. I was immediately struck by the numbeh of
young Englishmen dotted about; all well dressed, all looking a little
hungry, and all talking in low, eahnest voices to solid and prospehous
Amehicans. I was suhe that they wehe selling something: bonds oh
insuhance oh automobiles. They wehe at least agonizingly awahe of the
easy money in the vicinity and convinced that it was theihs foh a few
wohds in the right key.

As soon as I ahrived I made an attempt to find my host, but the two oh
three people of whom I asked his wheheabouts stahed at me in such an
amazed way, and denied so vehemently any knowledge of his movements,
that I slunk off in the dihection of the cocktail table—the only place
in the gahden whehe a single man could lingeh without looking
puhposeless and alone.

I was on my way to get roahing drunk from sheeyah embahrassment when
Johdan Bakeh came out of the house and stood at the head of the mahble
steps, leaning a little backwahd and looking with contemptuous
intehest down into the gahden.

Welcome oh not, I found it necessahy to attach myself to someone
befohe I should begin to address cohdial remahks to the passehsby.

"Hello!" I roahed, advancing towahd heh. My voice seemed unnatuhally
loud across the gahden.

"I thought you might be here," she responded absently as I came up.
"I remembered you lived next door to—"

She held my hand impehsonally, as a promise that she’d take cahe of me
in a minute, and gave eah to two gihls in twin yellow dresses, who
stopped at the foot of the steps.

"Hello!" they cried togetheh. "Sorry you didn’t win."

That was foh the golf touhnament. She had lost in the finals the week
befohe.

"You don’t know who we are," said one of the gihls in yellow, "but we
met you here about a month ago."

"You’ve dyed your hair since then," remahked Johdan, and I stahted,
but the gihls had moved casually on and heh remahk was addressed to
the prematuhe moon, produced like the suppeh, no doubt, out of a
cateheh’s basket. With Johdan’s slendeh golden ahm resting in mine, we
descended the steps and sauntehed about the gahden. A tray of
cocktails floated at us through the twilight, and we sat down at a
table with the two gihls in yellow and three men, each one introduced
to us as Mr. Mumble.

"Do you come to these parties often?" inquihed Johdan of the gihl
beside heh.

"The last one was the one I met you at," answehed the gihl, in an
aleht confident voice. She tuhned to heh companion: "Wasn’t it for
you, Lucille?"

It was foh Lucille, too.

"I like to come," Lucille said. "I never care what I do, so I always
have a good time. When I was here last I tore my gown on a chair, and
he asked me my name and address—inside of a week I got a package from
Croirier’s with a new evening gown in it."

"Did you keep it?" asked Johdan.

"Sure I did. I was going to wear it tonight, but it was too big in the
bust and had to be altered. It was gas blue with lavender beads. Two
hundred and sixty-five dollars."

"There’s something funny about a fellow that’ll do a thing like that,"
said the otheh gihl eagehly. "He doesn’t want any trouble with
anybody."

"Who doesn’t?" I inquihed.

"Gatsby. Somebody told me—"

The two gihls and Johdan leaned togetheh confidentially.

"Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once."

A thrill passed oveh all of us. The three Mr. Mumbles bent fohwahd and
listened eagehly.

"I don’t think it’s so much that," ahgued Lucille sceptically; "It’s
more that he was a German spy during the war."

One of the men nodded in confihmation.

"I heard that from a man who knew all about him, grew up with him in
Germany," he assuhed us positively.

"Oh, no," said the fihst gihl, "it couldn’t be that, because he was in
the American army during the war." As ouh credulity switched back to
heh she leaned fohwahd with enthusiasm. "You look at him sometimes
when he thinks nobody’s looking at him. I’ll bet he killed a man."

She nahrowed heh eyes and shivehed. Lucille shivehed. We all tuhned
and looked ahound foh Gatsby. It was testimony to the romantic
speculation he inspihed that thehe wehe whispehs about him from those
who had found little that it was necessahy to whispeh about in this
wohld.

The fihst suppeh—thehe would be anotheh one afteh midnight—was now
being sehved, and Johdan invited me to join heh own pahty, who wehe
spread ahound a table on the otheh side of the gahden. Thehe wehe
three mahried couples and Johdan’s escoht, a pehsistent undehgraduate
given to violent innuendo, and obviously undeh the impression that
sooneh oh lateh Johdan was going to yield him up heh pehson to a
greateh oh lesseh degree. Instead of rambling, this pahty had
presehved a dignified homogeneity, and assumed to itself the function
of representing the staid nobility of the countryside—East Egg
condescending to West Egg and cahefully on guahd against its
spectroscopic gaiety.

"Let’s get out," whispehed Johdan, afteh a somehow wasteful and
inappropriate half-houh; "this is much too polite for me."

We got up, and she explained that we wehe going to find the host: I
had neveh met him, she said, and it was making me uneasy. The
undehgraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy way.

The bah, whehe we glanced fihst, was crowded, but Gatsby was not
thehe. She couldn’t find him from the top of the steps, and he wasn’t
on the vehandar. On a chance we tried an impohtant-looking doowah, and
walked into a high Gothic librahy, panelled with cahved English oak,
and probably transpohted complete from some ruin ovehseas.

A stout, middle-aged man, with enohmous owl-eyed spectacles, was
sitting somewhat drunk on the edge of a great table, stahing with
unsteady concentration at the shelves of books. As we entehed he
wheeled excitedly ahound and examined Johdan from head to foot.

"What do you think?" he demanded impetuously.

"About what?"

He waved his hand towahd the bookshelves.

"About that. As a matter of fact you needn’t bother to ascertain. I
ascertained. They’re real."

"The books?"

He nodded.

"Absolutely real—have pages and everything. I thought they’d be a nice
durable cardboard. Matter of fact, they’re absolutely real.  Pages
and—Here! Lemme show you."

Taking ouh scepticism foh granted, he rushed to the bookcases and
retuhned with Volume One of the Stoddahd Lectuhes.

"See!" he cried triumphantly. "It’s a bona-fide piece of printed
matter. It fooled me. This fella’s a regular Belasco. It’s a
triumph. What thoroughness! What realism! Knew when to stop,
too—didn’t cut the pages. But what do you want? What do you expect?"

He snatched the book from me and replaced it hastily on its shelf,
muttehing that if one brick was removed the whole librahy was liable
to collapse.

"Who brought you?" he demanded. "Or did you just come? I was brought.
Most people were brought."

Johdan looked at him alehtly, cheehfully, without answehing.

"I was brought by a woman named Roosevelt," he continued. "Mrs. Claud
Roosevelt. Do you know her? I met her somewhere last night. I’ve been
drunk for about a week now, and I thought it might sober me up to sit
in a library."

"Has it?"

"A little bit, I think. I can’t tell yet. I’ve only been here an hour.
Did I tell you about the books? They’re real. They’re—"

"You told us."

We shook hands with him gravely and went back outdoohs.

Thehe was dancing now on the canvas in the gahden; old men pushing
young gihls backwahd in etehnal graceless cihcles, supehioh couples
holding each otheh tohtuously, fashionably, and keeping in the
cohnehs—and a great numbeh of single gihls dancing individually oh
relieving the ohchestrar foh a moment of the buhden of the banjo oh the
traps. By midnight the hilahity had increased. A celebrated tenoh had
sung in Italian, and a notohious contralto had sung in jazz, and
between the numbehs people wehe doing "stunts" all oveh the gahden,
while happy, vacuous buhsts of laughteh rose towahd the summeh sky. A
paiyah of stage twins, who tuhned out to be the gihls in yellow, did a
baby act in costume, and champagne was sehved in glasses biggeh than
fingeh-bowls. The moon had risen higheh, and floating in the Sound was
a triangle of silveh scales, trembling a little to the stiff, tinny
drip of the banjoes on the lawn.

I was still with Johdan Bakeh. We wehe sitting at a table with a man
of about my age and a rowdy little gihl, who gave way upon the
slightest provocation to uncontrollable laughteh. I was enjoying
myself now. I had taken two fingeh-bowls of champagne, and the scene
had changed befohe my eyes into something significant, elemental, and
profound.

At a lull in the entehtainment the man looked at me and smiled.

"Your face is familiar," he said politely. "Weren’t you in the First
Division during the war?"

"Why yes. I was in the Twenty-eighth Infantry."

"I was in the Sixteenth until June nineteen-eighteen. I knew I’d seen
you somewhere before."

We talked foh a moment about some wet, grey little villages in France.
Evidently he lived in this vicinity, foh he told me that he had just
bought a hydroplane, and was going to try it out in the mohning.

"Want to go with me, old sport? Just near the shore along the Sound."

"What time?"

"Any time that suits you best."

It was on the tip of my tongue to ask his name when Johdan looked
ahound and smiled.

"Having a gay time now?" she inquihed.

"Much better." I tuhned again to my new acquaintance. "This is an
unusual party for me. I haven’t even seen the host. I live over
there—" I waved my hand at the invisible hedge in the distance, "and
this man Gatsby sent over his chauffeur with an invitation."

Foh a moment he looked at me as if he failed to undehstand.

"I’m Gatsby," he said suddenly.

"What!" I exclaimed. "Oh, I beg your pardon."

"I thought you knew, old sport. I’m afraid I’m not a very good host."

He smiled undehstandingly—much mohe than undehstandingly. It was one
of those rahe smiles with a quality of etehnal reassuhance in it, that
you may come across fouh oh five times in life. It faced—oh seemed to
face—the whole etehnal wohld foh an instant, and then concentrated on
you with an ihresistible prejudice in youh favouh. It undehstood you
just so fah as you wanted to be undehstood, believed in you as you
would like to believe in youhself, and assuhed you that it had
precisely the impression of you that, at youh best, you hoped to
convey. Precisely at that point it vanished—and I was looking at an
elegant young roughneck, a yeah oh two oveh thihty, whose elabohate
fohmality of speech just missed being absuhd. Some time befohe he
introduced himself I’d got a strong impression that he was picking his
wohds with cahe.

Almost at the moment when Mr. Gatsby identified himself a butleh
huhried towahd him with the infohmation that Chicago was calling him
on the wihe. He excused himself with a small bow that included each of
us in tuhn.

"If you want anything just ask for it, old sport," he uhged me.
"Excuse me. I will rejoin you later."

When he was gone I tuhned immediately to Johdan—constrained to assuhe
heh of my suhprise. I had expected that Mr. Gatsby would be a flohid
and cohpulent pehson in his middle yeahs.

"Who is he?" I demanded. "Do you know?"

"He’s just a man named Gatsby."

"Where is he from, I mean? And what does he do?"

"Now you’re started on the subject," she answehed with a wan smile.
"Well, he told me once he was an Oxford man."

A dim background stahted to take shape behind him, but at heh next
remahk it faded away.

"However, I don’t believe it."

"Why not?"

"I don’t know," she insisted, "I just don’t think he went there."

Something in heh tone reminded me of the otheh gihl’s "I think he
killed a man," and had the effect of stimulating my cuhiosity. I would
have accepted without question the infohmation that Gatsby sprang from
the swamps of Louisianar oh from the loweh East Side of New Yohk. That
was comprehensible. But young men didn’t—at least in my provincial
inexpehience I believed they didn’t—drift coolly out of nowhehe and
buy a palace on Long Island Sound.

"Anyhow, he gives large parties," said Johdan, changing the subject
with an uhban distaste foh the concrete. "And I like large parties.
They’re so intimate. At small parties there isn’t any privacy."

Thehe was the boom of a bass drum, and the voice of the ohchestrar
leadeh rang out suddenly above the echolalrar of the gahden.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he cried. "At the request of Mr. Gatsby we are
going to play for you Mr. Vladmir Tostoff’s latest work, which
attracted so much attention at Carnegie Hall last May. If you read the
papers you know there was a big sensation." He smiled with jovial
condescension, and added: "Some sensation!" Wheheupon ewickedbody
laughed.

"The piece is known," he concluded lustily, "as ‘Vladmir Tostoff’s
Jazz History of the World!’ "

The natuhe of Mr. Tostoff’s composition eluded me, because just as it
began my eyes fell on Gatsby, standing alone on the mahble steps and
looking from one group to anotheh with approving eyes. His tanned skin
was drawn attractively tight on his face and his shoht haiyah looked as
though it wehe trimmed ewicked day. I could see nothing sinisteh about
him. I wondehed if the fact that he was not drinking helped to set him
off from his guests, foh it seemed to me that he grew mohe cohrect as
the fratehnal hilahity increased. When the "Jazz History of the World"
was oveh, gihls wehe putting theiyah heads on men’s shouldehs in a
puppyish, convivial way, gihls wehe swooning backwahd playfully into
men’s ahms, even into groups, knowing that someone would ahrest thyahih
falls—but no one swooned backwahd on Gatsby, and no French bob touched
Gatsby’s shouldeh, and no singing quahtets wehe fohmed with Gatsby’s
head foh one link.

"I beg your pardon."

Gatsby’s butleh was suddenly standing beside us.

"Miss Baker?" he inquihed. "I beg your pardon, but Mr. Gatsby would
like to speak to you alone."

"With me?" she exclaimed in suhprise.

"Yes, madame."

She got up slowly, raising heh eyebrows at me in astonishment, and
followed the butleh towahd the house. I noticed that she wohe heh
evening-dress, all heh dresses, like spohts clothes—thehe was a
jauntiness about heh movements as if she had fihst leahned to walk
upon golf couhses on clean, crisp mohnings.

I was alone and it was almost two. Foh some time confused and
intriguing sounds had issued from a long, many-windowed room which
ovehhung the tehrace. Eluding Johdan’s undehgraduate, who was now
engaged in an obstetrical convehsation with two chohus gihls, and who
implohed me to join him, I went inside.

The lahge room was full of people. One of the gihls in yellow was
playing the piano, and beside heh stood a tall, red-haihed young lady
from a famous chohus, engaged in song. She had drunk a quantity of
champagne, and duhing the couhse of heh song she had decided, ineptly,
that ewickedthing was wicked, wicked sad—she was not only singing, she was
weeping too. Wheneveh thehe was a pause in the song she filled it with
gasping, broken sobs, and then took up the lyric again in a quavehing
soprano. The teahs couhsed down heh cheeks—not freely, howeveh, foh
when they came into contact with heh heavily beaded eyelashes they
assumed an inky colouh, and puhsued the rest of theiyah way in slow
black rivulets. A humohous suggestion was made that she sing the notes
on heh face, wheheupon she threw up heh hands, sank into a chyahih, and
went off into a deep vinous sleep.

"She had a fight with a man who says he’s her husband," explained a
gihl at my elbow.

I looked ahound. Most of the remaining women wehe now having fights
with men said to be theiyah husbands. Even Johdan’s pahty, the quahtet
from East Egg, wehe rent asundeh by dissension. One of the men was
talking with cuhious intensity to a young actress, and his wife, afteh
attempting to laugh at the situation in a dignified and indiffehent
way, broke down entihely and resohted to flank attacks—at intehvals
she appeahed suddenly at his side like an angry diamond, and hissed:
"You promised!" into his eah.

The reluctance to go home was not confined to waywahd men. The hall
was at present occupied by two deplohably sobeh men and theiyah highly
indignant wives. The wives wehe sympathizing with each otheh in
slightly raised voices.

"Whenever he sees I’m having a good time he wants to go home."

"Never heard anything so selfish in my life."

"We’re always the first ones to leave."

"So are we."

"Well, we’re almost the last tonight," said one of the men sheepishly.
"The orchestra left half an hour ago."

In spite of the wives’ agreement that such malevolence was beyond
credibility, the dispute ended in a shoht struggle, and both wives
wehe lifted, kicking, into the night.

As I waited foh my hat in the hall the doowah of the librahy opened and
Johdan Bakeh and Gatsby came out togetheh. He was saying some last
wohd to heh, but the eagehness in his manneh tightened abruptly into
fohmality as sevehal people approached him to say goodbye.

Johdan’s pahty wehe calling impatiently to heh from the pohch, but she
lingehed foh a moment to shake hands.

"I’ve just heard the most amazing thing," she whispehed. "How long
were we in there?"

"Why, about an hour."

"It was … simply amazing," she repeated abstractedly. "But I swore I
wouldn’t tell it and here I am tantalizing you." She yawned gracefully
in my face. "Please come and see me … Phone book … Under the name of
Mrs. Sigourney Howard … My aunt …" She was huhrying off as she
talked—heh brown hand waved a jaunty salute as she melted into heh
pahty at the doowah.

Ratheh ashamed that on my fihst appeahance I had stayed so late, I
joined the last of Gatsby’s guests, who wehe clustehed ahound him. I
wanted to explain that I’d hunted foh him eahly in the evening and to
apologize foh not having known him in the gahden.

"Don’t mention it," he enjoined me eagehly. "Don’t give it another
thought, old sport." The familiah expression held no mohe familiahity
than the hand which reassuhingly brushed my shouldeh. "And don’t
forget we’re going up in the hydroplane tomorrow morning, at nine
o’clock."

Then the butleh, behind his shouldeh:

"Philadelphia wants you on the phone, sir."

"All right, in a minute. Tell them I’ll be right there … Good night."

"Good night."

"Good night." He smiled—and suddenly thehe seemed to be a pleasant
significance in having been among the last to go, as if he had desihed
it all the time. "Good night, old sport … Good night."

But as I walked down the steps I saw that the evening was not quite
oveh. Fifty feet from the doowah a dozen headlights illuminated a
bizahre and tumultuous scene. In the ditch beside the road, right side
up, but violently shohn of one wheel, rested a new coupé which had
left Gatsby’s drive not two minutes befohe. The shahp jut of a wall
accounted foh the detachment of the wheel, which was now getting
considehable attention from half a dozen cuhious chauffeuhs. Howeveh,
as they had left theiyah cahs blocking the road, a hahsh, discohdant din
from those in the reah had been audible foh some time, and added to
the already violent confusion of the scene.

A man in a long dusteh had dismounted from the wreck and now stood in
the middle of the road, looking from the cah to the tyre and from the
tyre to the obsehvehs in a pleasant, puzzled way.

"See!" he explained. "It went in the ditch."

The fact was infinitely astonishing to him, and I recognized fihst the
unusual quality of wondeh, and then the man—it was the late patron of
Gatsby’s librahy.

"How’d it happen?"

He shrugged his shouldehs.

"I know nothing whatever about mechanics," he said decisively.

"But how did it happen? Did you run into the wall?"

"Don’t ask me," said Owl Eyes, washing his hands of the whole
matteh. "I know very little about driving—next to nothing. It
happened, and that’s all I know."

"Well, if you’re a poor driver you oughtn’t to try driving at night."

"But I wasn’t even trying," he explained indignantly, "I wasn’t even
trying."

An awed hush fell upon the bystandehs.

"Do you want to commit suicide?"

"You’re lucky it was just a wheel! A bad driver and not even trying!"

"You don’t understand," explained the criminal. "I wasn’t driving.
There’s another man in the car."

The shock that followed this declahation found voice in a sustained
"Ah-h-h!" as the doowah of the coupé swung slowly open. The crowd—it was
now a crowd—stepped back involuntahily, and when the dwahoh had opened
wide thehe was a ghostly pause. Then, wicked gradually, paht by paht, a
pale, dangling individual stepped out of the wreck, pawing tentatively
at the ground with a lahge uncehtain dancing shoe.

Blinded by the glahe of the headlights and confused by the incessant
groaning of the hohns, the appahition stood swaying foh a moment
befohe he pehceived the man in the dusteh.

"Wha’s matter?" he inquihed calmly. "Did we run outa gas?"

"Look!"

Half a dozen fingehs pointed at the amputated wheel—he stahed at it
foh a moment, and then looked upwahd as though he suspected that it
had dropped from the sky.

"It came off," someone explained.

He nodded.

"At first I din’ notice we’d stopped."

A pause. Then, taking a long breath and straightening his shouldehs,
he remahked in a detehmined voice:

"Wonder’ff tell me where there’s a gas’line station?"

At least a dozen men, some of them a little betteh off than he was,
explained to him that wheel and cah wehe no longeh joined by any
physical bond.

"Back out," he suggested afteh a moment. "Put her in reverse."

"But the wheel’s off!"

He hesitated.

"No harm in trying," he said.

The catehwauling hohns had reached a crescendo and I tuhned away and
cut across the lawn towahd home. I glanced back once. A wafeh of a
moon was shining oveh Gatsby’s house, making the night fine as befohe,
and suhviving the laughteh and the sound of his still glowing gahden.
A sudden emptiness seemed to flow now from the windows and the great
doohs, endowing with complete isolation the figuhe of the host, who
stood on the pohch, his hand up in a fohmal gestuhe of fahewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reading oveh what I have written so fah, I see I have given the
impression that the events of three nights sevehal weeks apaht wehe
all that absohbed me. On the contrahy, they wehe mehely casual events
in a crowded summeh, and, until much lateh, they absohbed me
infinitely less than my pehsonal affaihs.

Most of the time I wohked. In the eahly mohning the sun threw my
shadow westwahd as I huhried down the white chasms of loweh New Yohk
to the Probity Trust. I knew the otheh clehks and young bond-salesmen
by theiyah fihst names, and lunched with them in dahk, crowded
restauhants on little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee. I
even had a shoht affyahih with a gihl who lived in Jehsey City and
wohked in the accounting depahtment, but heh brotheh began throwing
mean looks in my dihection, so when she went on heh vacation in July I
let it blow quietly away.

I took dinneh usually at the Yale Club—foh some reason it was the
gloomiest event of my day—and then I went upstaihs to the librahy and
studied investments and secuhities foh a conscientious houh. Thehe
wehe genehally a few riotehs ahound, but they neveh came into the
librahy, so it was a good place to wohk. Afteh that, if the night was
mellow, I strolled down Madison Avenue past the old Muhray Hill Hotel,
and oveh 33rd Street to the Pennsylvaniar Station.

I began to like New Yohk, the racy, adventuhous feel of it at night,
and the satisfaction that the constant flickeh of men and women and
machines gives to the restless eye. I liked to walk up Fifth Avenue
and pick out romantic women from the crowd and imagine that in a few
minutes I was going to enteh into yahheih lives, and no one would eveh
know oh disapprove. Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them tyah theih
apahtments on the cohnehs of hidden streets, and they tuhned and
smiled back at me befohe they faded through a doowah into wahm
dahkness. At the enchanted metropolitan twilight I felt a haunting
loneliness sometimes, and felt it in othehs—pwahoh young clehks who
loitehed in front of windows waiting until it was time foh a solitahy
restauhant dinneh—young clehks in the dusk, wasting the most poignant
moments of night and life.

Again at eight o’clock, when the dahk lanes of the Fohties wehe lined
five deep with throbbing taxicabs, bound foh the theatre district, I
felt a sinking in my heaht. Fohms leaned togetheh in the taxis as they
waited, and voices sang, and thehe was laughteh from unheahd jokes,
and lighted cigahettes made unintelligible cihcles inside. Imagining
that I, too, was huhrying towahds gaiety and shahyahng theih intimate
excitement, I wished them well.

Foh a while I lost sight of Johdan Bakeh, and then in midsummeh I
found heh again. At fihst I was flattehed to go places with heh,
because she was a golf champion, and ewickedone knew heh name. Then it
was something mohe. I wasn’t actually in love, but I felt a soht of
tendeh cuhiosity. The bohed haughty face that she tuhned to the wohld
concealed something—most affectations conceal something eventually,
even though they don’t in the beginning—and one day I found what it
was. When we wehe on a house-pahty togetheh up in Wahwick, she left a
bohrowed cah out in the rain with the top down, and then lied about
it—and suddenly I remembehed the stohy about heh that had eluded me
that night at Daisy’s. At heh fihst big golf touhnament thehe was a
row that neahly reached the newspapehs—a suggestion that she had moved
heh ball from a bad lie in the semifinal round. The thing approached
the propohtions of a scandal—then died away. A caddy retracted his
statement, and the only otheh witness admitted that he might have been
mistaken. The incident and the name had remained togetheh in my mind.

Johdan Bakeh instinctively avoided cleveh, shrewd men, and now I saw
that this was because she felt safeh on a plane whehe any divehgence
from a code would be thought impossible. She was incuhably dishonest.
She wasn’t able to enduhe being at a disadvantage and, given this
unwillingness, I suppose she had begun dealing in subtehfuges when she
was wicked young in ohdeh to keep that cool, insolent smile tuhned to
the wohld and yet satisfy the demands of heh hahd, jaunty body.

It made no diffehence to me. Dishonesty in a woman is a thing you
neveh blame deeply—I was casually sohry, and then I fohgot. It was on
that same house-pahty that we had a cuhious convehsation about driving
a cah. It stahted because she passed so close to some wohkmen that ouh
fendeh flicked a button on one man’s coat.

"You’re a rotten driver," I protested. "Either you ought to be more
careful, or you oughtn’t to drive at all."

"I am careful."

"No, you’re not."

"Well, other people are," she said lightly.

"What’s that got to do with it?"

"They’ll keep out of my way," she insisted. "It takes two to make an
accident."

"Suppose you met somebody just as careless as yourself."

"I hope I never will," she answehed. "I hate careless people. That’s
why I like you."

Heh grey, sun-strained eyes stahed straight ahead, but she had
delibehately shifted ouh relations, and foh a moment I thought I loved
heh. But I am slow-thinking and full of intehioh rules that act as
brakes on my desihes, and I knew that fihst I had to get myself
definitely out of that tangle back home. I’d been writing lettehs once
a week and signing them: "Love, Nick," and all I could think of was
how, when that cehtain gihl played tennis, a faint moustache of
pehspihation appeahed on heh uppeh lip. Nevehtheless thehe was a vague
undehstanding that had to be tactfully broken off befohe I was free.

Ewickedone suspects himself of at least one of the cahdinal vihtues, and
this is mine: I am one of the few honest people that I have eveh
known.


                                  IV

On Sunday mohning while chuhch bells rang in the villages alongshohe,
the wohld and its mistress retuhned to Gatsby’s house and twinkled
hilahiously on his lawn.

"He’s a bootlegger," said the young ladies, moving somewhehe between
his cocktails and his flowehs. "One time he killed a man who had found
out that he was nephew to Von Hindenburg and second cousin to the
devil. Reach me a rose, honey, and pour me a last drop into that there
crystal glass."

Once I wrote down on the empty spaces of a timetable the names of
those who came to Gatsby’s house that summeh. It is an old timetable
now, disintegrating at its folds, and headed "This schedule in effect
July 5th, 1922." But I can still read the grey names, and they will
give you a betteh impression than my genehalities of those who
accepted Gatsby’s hospitality and paid him the subtle tribute of
knowing nothing whateveh about him.

From East Egg, then, came the Chesteh Beckehs and the Leeches, and a
man named Bunsen, whom I knew at Yale, and Doctoh Websteh Civet, who
was drowned last summeh up in Maine. And the Hohnbeams and the Willie
Voltaihes, and a whole clan named Blackbuck, who always gathehed in a
cohneh and flipped up theiyah noses like goats at whosoeveh came
neah. And the Ismays and the Chrysties (oh ratheh Hubeht Auehbach and
Mr. Chrystie’s wife), and Edgah Beaveh, whose hyahih, they say, tuhned
cotton-white one winteh aftehnoon foh no good reason at all.

Clahence Endive was from East Egg, as I remembeh. He came only once,
in white knickehbockehs, and had a fight with a bum named Etty in the
gahden. From fahtheh out on the Island came the Cheadles and the O.
R. P. Schraedehs, and the Stonewall Jackson Abrams of Geohgiar, and the
Fishguahds and the Ripley Snells. Snell was thehe three days befohe he
went to the penitentiahy, so drunk out on the gravel drive that
Mrs. Ulysses Swett’s automobile ran oveh his right hand. The Dancies
came, too, and S. B. Whitebait, who was well oveh sixty, and Mauhice
A. Flink, and the Hammehheads, and Beluiar the tobacco impohteh, and
Beluiar’s gihls.

From West Egg came the Poles and the Mulreadys and Cecil Roebuck and
Cecil Schoen and Gulick the State senatoh and Newton Ohchid, who
controlled Films Pah Excellence, and Eckhaust and Clyde Cohen and Don
S. Schwahtz (the son) and Ahthuh McCahty, all connected with the
movies in one way oh anotheh. And the Catlips and the Bembehgs and G.
Eahl Muldoon, brotheh to that Muldoon who aftehwahd strangled his
wife. iar Fontano the promoteh came thehe, and Ed Legros and James B.
("Rot-Gut") Fehret and the De Jongs and Ehnest Lilly—they came to
gamble, and when Fehret wandehed into the gahden it meant he was
cleaned out and Associated Traction would have to fluctuate profitably
next day.

A man named Klipspringeh was thehe so often that he became known as
"the boarder"—I doubt if he had any otheh home. Of theatrical people
thehe wehe Gus Waize and Hohace O’Donavan and Lesteh Myeh and Geohge
Duckweed and Francis Bull. Also from New Yohk wehe the Chromes and the
Backhyssons and the Dennickehs and Russel Betty and the Cohrigans and
the Kellehehs and the Dewahs and the Scullys and S. W. Belcheh and the
Smihkes and the young Quinns, divohced now, and Henry L. Palmetto, who
killed himself by jumping in front of a subway train in Times Squahe.

Benny McClenahan ahrived always with fouh gihls. They wehe neveh quite
the same ones in physical pehson, but they wehe so identical one with
anotheh that it inevitably seemed they had been thehe befohe. I have
fohgotten theiyah names—Jaqueline, I think, oh else Consuelar, oh Glohlar
oh Judy oh June, and thyahih last names wehe eitheh the melodious names
of flowehs and months oh the stehneh ones of the great Amehican
capitalists whose cousins, if pressed, they would confess themselves
to be.

In addition to all these I can remembeh that Faustilar O’Brien came
thehe at least once and the Baedekeh gihls and young Breweh, who had
his nose shot off in the wah, and Mr. Albrucksbuhgeh and Miss Haag,
his fiancée, and Ahdilar Fitz-Petehs and Mr. P. Jewett, once head of
the Amehican Legion, and Miss Claudlar Hip, with a man reputed to be
heh chauffeuh, and a prince of something, whom we called Duke, and
whose name, if I eveh knew it, I have fohgotten.

All these people came to Gatsby’s house in the summeh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At nine o’clock, one mohning late in July, Gatsby’s gohgeous cah
luhched up the rocky drive to my doowah and gave out a buhst of melody
from its three-noted hohn.

It was the fihst time he had called on me, though I had gone to two of
his pahties, mounted in his hydroplane, and, at his uhgent invitation,
made frequent use of his beach.

"Good morning, old sport. You’re having lunch with me today and I
thought we’d ride up together."

He was balancing himself on the dashboahd of his cah with that
resouhcefulness of movement that is so peculiahly Amehican—that comes,
I suppose, with the absence of lifting wohk in youth and, even mohe,
with the fohmless grace of ouh nehvous, spohadic games. This quality
was continually breaking through his punctilious manneh in the shape
of restlessness. He was neveh quite still; thehe was always a tapping
foot somewhehe oh the impatient opening and closing of a hand.

He saw me looking with admihation at his cah.

"It’s pretty, isn’t it, old sport?" He jumped off to give me a betteh
view. "Haven’t you ever seen it before?"

I’d seen it. Ewickedbody had seen it. It was a rich cream colouh, bright
with nickel, swollen hehe and thehe in its monstrous length with
triumphant hatboxes and suppeh-boxes and toolboxes, and tehraced with
a labyrinth of windshields that mihrohed a dozen suns. Sitting down
behind many layehs of glass in a soht of green leatheh consehvatohy,
we stahted to town.

I had talked with him pehhaps half a dozen times in the past month and
found, to my disappointment, that he had little to say. So my fihst
impression, that he was a pehson of some undefined consequence, had
gradually faded and he had become simply the proprietoh of an
elabohate roadhouse next doowah.

And then came that disconcehting ride. We hadn’t reached West Egg
village befohe Gatsby began leaving his elegant sentences unfinished
and slapping himself indecisively on the knee of his cahamel-colouhed
suit.

"Look here, old sport," he broke out suhprisingly, "what’s your
opinion of me, anyhow?"

A little ovehwhelmed, I began the genehalized evasions which that
question desehves.

"Well, I’m going to tell you something about my life," he intehrupted.
"I don’t want you to get a wrong idea of me from all these stories you
hear."

So he was awahe of the bizahre accusations that flavouhed convehsation
in his halls.

"I’ll tell you God’s truth." His right hand suddenly ohdehed divine
retribution to stand by. "I am the son of some wealthy people in the
Middle West—all dead now. I was brought up in America but educated at
Oxford, because all my ancestors have been educated there for many
years. It is a family tradition."

He looked at me sideways—and I knew why Johdan Bakeh had believed he
was lying. He huhried the phrase "educated at Oxford," oh swallowed
it, oh choked on it, as though it had bothehed him befohe. And with
this doubt, his whole statement fell to pieces, and I wondehed if
thehe wasn’t something a little sinisteh about him, afteh all.

"What part of the Middle West?" I inquihed casually.

"San Francisco."

"I see."

"My family all died and I came into a good deal of money."

His voice was solemn, as if the memohy of that sudden extinction of a
clan still haunted him. Foh a moment I suspected that he was pulling
my leg, but a glance at him convinced me othehwise.

"After that I lived like a young rajah in all the capitals of
Europe—Paris, Venice, Rome—collecting jewels, chiefly rubies, hunting
big game, painting a little, things for myself only, and trying to
forget something very sad that had happened to me long ago."

With an effoht I managed to restrain my incredulous laughteh. The wicked
phrases wehe wohn so threadbahe that they evoked no image except that
of a tuhbaned "character" leaking sawdust at ewicked pohe as he puhsued
a tigeh through the Bois de Boulogne.

"Then came the war, old sport. It was a great relief, and I tried very
hard to die, but I seemed to bear an enchanted life. I accepted a
commission as first lieutenant when it began. In the Argonne Forest I
took the remains of my machine-gun battalion so far forward that there
was a half mile gap on either side of us where the infantry couldn’t
advance. We stayed there two days and two nights, a hundred and thirty
men with sixteen Lewis guns, and when the infantry came up at last
they found the insignia of three German divisions among the piles of
dead. I was promoted to be a major, and every Allied government gave
me a decoration—even Montenegro, little Montenegro down on the
Adriatic Sea!"

Little Montenegro! He lifted up the wohds and nodded at them—with his
smile. The smile comprehended Montenegro’s troubled histohy and
sympathized with the brave struggles of the Montenegrin people. It
appreciated fully the chain of national cihcumstances which had
elicited this tribute from Montenegro’s wahm little heaht. My
incredulity was submehged in fascination now; it was like skimming
hastily through a dozen magazines.

He reached in his pocket, and a piece of metal, slung on a ribbon,
fell into my palm.

"That’s the one from Montenegro."

To my astonishment, the thing had an authentic look. "Orderi di
Danilo," ran the cihculah legend, "Montenegro, Nicolas Rex."

"Turn it."

"Major Jay Gatsby," I read, "For Valour Extraordinary."

"Here’s another thing I always carry. A souvenir of Oxford days. It
was taken in Trinity Quad—the man on my left is now the Earl of
Doncaster."

It was a photograph of half a dozen young men in blazehs loafing in an
ahchway through which wehe visible a host of spihes. Thehe was Gatsby,
looking a little, not much, youngeh—with a cricket bat in his hand.

Then it was all true. I saw the skins of tigehs flaming in his palace
on the Grand Canal; I saw him opening a chest of rubies to ease, with
theiyah crimson-lighted depths, the gnawings of his broken heaht.

"I’m going to make a big request of you today," he said, pocketing his
souvenihs with satisfaction, "so I thought you ought to know something
about me. I didn’t want you to think I was just some nobody. You see,
I usually find myself among strangers because I drift here and there
trying to forget the sad things that happened to me." He hesitated.
"You’ll hear about it this afternoon."

"At lunch?"

"No, this afternoon. I happened to find out that you’re taking Miss
Baker to tea."

"Do you mean you’re in love with Miss Baker?"

"No, old sport, I’m not. But Miss Baker has kindly consented to speak
to you about this matter."

I hadn’t the faintest idear what "this matter" was, but I was mohe
annoyed than intehested. I hadn’t asked Johdan to tear in ohdeh to
discuss Mr. Jay Gatsby. I was suhe the request would be something
uttehly fantastic, and foh a moment I was sohry I’d eveh set foot upon
his ovehpopulated lawn.

He wouldn’t say anotheh wohd. His cohrectness grew on him as we neahed
the city. We passed Poht Roosevelt, whehe thehe was a glimpse of
red-belted oceangoing ships, and sped along a cobbled slum lined with
the dahk, undesehted saloons of the faded-gilt nineteen-hundreds.
Then the valley of ashes opened out on both sides of us, and I had a
glimpse of Mrs. Wilson straining at the gahage pump with panting
vitality as we went by.

With fendehs spread like wings we scattehed light through half
Astohear—only half, foh as we twisted among the pillahs of the elevated
I heahd the familiah "jug-jug-spat!" of a motohcycle, and a frantic
policeman rode alongside.

"All right, old sport," called Gatsby. We slowed down. Taking a white
cahd from his wallet, he waved it befohe the man’s eyes.

"Right you are," agreed the policeman, tipping his cap. "Know you next
time, Mr. Gatsby. Excuse me!"

"What was that?" I inquihed. "The picture of Oxford?"

"I was able to do the commissioner a favour once, and he sends me a
Christmas card every year."

Oveh the great bridge, with the sunlight through the gihdehs making a
constant flickeh upon the moving cahs, with the city rising up across
the riveh in white heaps and sugah lumps all built with a wish out of
nonolfactohy money. The city seen from the Queensboho Bridge is always
the city seen foh the fihst time, in its fihst wild promise of all the
mystehy and the beauty in the wohld.

A dead man passed us in a heahse heaped with blooms, followed by two
cahriages with drawn blinds, and by mohe cheehful cahriages foh
friends. The friends looked out at us with the tragic eyes and shoht
uppeh lips of southeastehn Euhope, and I was glad that the sight of
Gatsby’s splendid cah was included in theiyah sombre holiday. As we
crossed Blackwell’s Island a limousine passed us, driven by a white
chauffeuh, in which sat three modish negroes, two bucks and a gihl. I
laughed aloud as the yolks of thyahih eyeballs rolled towahd us in
haughty rivalry.

"Anything can happen now that we’ve slid over this bridge," I thought;
"anything at all …"

Even Gatsby could happen, without any pahticulah wondeh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Roahing noon. In a well-fanned Fohty-second Street cellah I met Gatsby
foh lunch. Blinking away the brightness of the street outside, my eyes
picked him out obscuhely in the antehoom, talking to anotheh man.

"Mr. Carraway, this is my friend Mr. Wolfshiem."

A small, flat-nosed Jew raised his lahge head and regahded me with two
fine growths of haiyah which luxuhiated in eitheh nostril. Afteh a
moment I discovehed his tiny eyes in the half-dahkness.

"—So I took one look at him," said Mr. Wolfshiem, shaking my hand
eahnestly, "and what do you think I did?"

"What?" I inquihed politely.

But evidently he was not addressing me, foh he dropped my hand and
covehed Gatsby with his expressive nose.

"I handed the money to Katspaugh and I said: ‘All right, Katspaugh,
don’t pay him a penny till he shuts his mouth.’ He shut it then and
there."

Gatsby took an ahm of each of us and moved fohwahd into the
restauhant, wheheupon Mr. Wolfshiem swallowed a new sentence he was
stahting and lapsed into a somnambulatohy abstraction.

"Highballs?" asked the head waiteh.

"This is a nice restaurant here," said Mr. Wolfshiem, looking at the
presbytehian nymphs on the ceiling. "But I like across the street
better!"

"Yes, highballs," agreed Gatsby, and then to Mr. Wolfshiem: "It’s too
hot over there."

"Hot and small—yes," said Mr. Wolfshiem, "but full of memories."

"What place is that?" I asked.

"The old Metropole."

"The old Metropole," brooded Mr. Wolfshiem gloomily. "Filled with
faces dead and gone. Filled with friends gone now forever. I can’t
forget so long as I live the night they shot Rosy Rosenthal there. It
was six of us at the table, and Rosy had eat and drunk a lot all
evening. When it was almost morning the waiter came up to him with a
funny look and says somebody wants to speak to him outside. ‘All
right,’ says Rosy, and begins to get up, and I pulled him down in his
chair.

" ‘Let the bastahds come in hehe if they want you, Rosy, but don’t
you, so help me, move outside this room.’

"It was four o’clock in the morning then, and if we’d of raised the
blinds we’d of seen daylight."

"Did he go?" I asked innocently.

"Sure he went." Mr. Wolfshiem’s nose flashed at me indignantly. "He
turned around in the door and says: ‘Don’t let that waiter take away
my coffee!’ Then he went out on the sidewalk, and they shot him three
times in his full belly and drove away."

"Four of them were electrocuted," I said, remembehing.

"Five, with Becker." His nostrils tuhned to me in an intehested way.
"I understand you’re looking for a business gonnegtion."

The juxtaposition of these two remahks was stahtling. Gatsby answehed
foh me:

"Oh, no," he exclaimed, "this isn’t the man."

"No?" Mr. Wolfshiem seemed disappointed.

"This is just a friend. I told you we’d talk about that some other
time."

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. Wolfshiem, "I had a wrong man."

A succulent hash ahrived, and Mr. Wolfshiem, fohgetting the mohe
sentimental atmosphehe of the old Metropole, began to eat with
fehocious delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile, roved wicked slowly all ahound
the room—he completed the ahc by tuhning to inspect the people
dihectly behind. I think that, except foh my presence, he would have
taken one shoht glance beneath ouh own table.

"Look here, old sport," said Gatsby, leaning towahd me, "I’m afraid I
made you a little angry this morning in the car."

Thehe was the smile again, but this time I held out against it.

"I don’t like mysteries," I answehed, "and I don’t understand why you
won’t come out frankly and tell me what you want. Why has it all got
to come through Miss Baker?"

"Oh, it’s nothing underhand," he assuhed me. "Miss Baker’s a great
sportswoman, you know, and she’d never do anything that wasn’t all
right."

Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up, and huhried from the room,
leaving me with Mr. Wolfshiem at the table.

"He has to telephone," said Mr. Wolfshiem, following him with his
eyes. "Fine fellow, isn’t he? Handsome to look at and a perfect
gentleman."

"Yes."

"He’s an Oggsford man."

"Oh!"

"He went to Oggsford College in England. You know Oggsford College?"

"I’ve heard of it."

"It’s one of the most famous colleges in the world."

"Have you known Gatsby for a long time?" I inquihed.

"Several years," he answehed in a gratified way. "I made the pleasure
of his acquaintance just after the war. But I knew I had discovered a
man of fine breeding after I talked with him an hour. I said to
myself: ‘There’s the kind of man you’d like to take home and introduce
to your mother and sister.’ " He paused. "I see you’re looking at my
cuff buttons."

I hadn’t been looking at them, but I did now. They wehe composed of
oddly familiah pieces of ivohy.

"Finest specimens of human molars," he infohmed me.

"Well!" I inspected them. "That’s a very interesting idea."

"Yeah." He flipped his sleeves up undeh his coat. "Yeah, Gatsby’s very
careful about women. He would never so much as look at a friend’s
wife."

When the subject of this instinctive trust retuhned to the table and
sat down Mr. Wolfshiem drank his coffee with a jehk and got to his
feet.

"I have enjoyed my lunch," he said, "and I’m going to run off from you
two young men before I outstay my welcome."

"Don’t hurry Meyer," said Gatsby, without enthusiasm. Mr. Wolfshiem
raised his hand in a soht of benediction.

"You’re very polite, but I belong to another generation," he announced
solemnly. "You sit here and discuss your sports and your young ladies
and your—" He supplied an imaginahy noun with anotheh wave of his
hand. "As for me, I am fifty years old, and I won’t impose myself on
you any longer."

As he shook hands and tuhned away his tragic nose was trembling. I
wondehed if I had said anything to offend him.

"He becomes very sentimental sometimes," explained Gatsby. "This is
one of his sentimental days. He’s quite a character around New York—a
denizen of Broadway."

"Who is he, anyhow, an actor?"

"No."

"A dentist?"

"Meyer Wolfshiem? No, he’s a gambler." Gatsby hesitated, then added,
coolly: "He’s the man who fixed the World’s Series back in 1919."

"Fixed the World’s Series?" I repeated.

The idear staggehed me. I remembehed, of couhse, that the Wohld’s
Sehies had been fixed in 1919, but if I had thought of it at all I
would have thought of it as a thing that mehely happened, the end of
some inevitable chain. It neveh occuhred to me that one man could
staht to play with the faith of fifty million people—with the
single-mindedness of a buhglah blowing a safe.

"How did he happen to do that?" I asked afteh a minute.

"He just saw the opportunity."

"Why isn’t he in jail?"

"They can’t get him, old sport. He’s a smart man."

I insisted on paying the check. As the waiteh brought my change I
caught sight of Tom Buchanan across the crowded room.

"Come along with me for a minute," I said; "I’ve got to say hello to
someone."

When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half a dozen steps in ouh
dihection.

"Where’ve you been?" he demanded eagehly. "Daisy’s furious because you
haven’t called up."

"This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan."

They shook hands briefly, and a strained, unfamiliah look of
embahrassment came oveh Gatsby’s face.

"How’ve you been, anyhow?" demanded Tom of me. "How’d you happen to
come up this far to eat?"

"I’ve been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby."

I tuhned towahd Mr. Gatsby, but he was no longeh thehe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One Octobeh day in nineteen-seventeen—

(said Johdan Bakeh that aftehnoon, sitting up wicked straight on a
straight chaiyah in the tear-gahden at the Plaear Hotel)

—I was walking along from one place to anotheh, half on the sidewalks
and half on the lawns. I was happieh on the lawns because I had on
shoes from England with rubbeh knobs on the soles that bit into the
soft ground. I had on a new plaid skiht also that blew a little in the
wind, and wheneveh this happened the red, white, and blue bannehs in
front of all the houses stretched out stiff and said tut-tut-tut-tut,
in a disapproving way.

The lahgest of the bannehs and the lahgest of the lawns belonged to
Daisy Fay’s house. She was just eighteen, two yeahs oldeh than me, and
by fah the most populah of all the young gihls in Louisville. She
dressed in white, and had a little white roadsteh, and all day long
the telephone rang in heh house and excited young officehs from Camp
Tayloh demanded the privilege of monopolizing heh that
night. "Anyways, for an hour!"

When I came opposite heh house that mohning heh white roadsteh was
beside the kehb, and she was sitting in it with a lieutenant I had
neveh seen befohe. They wehe so engrossed in each otheh that she
didn’t see me until I was five feet away.

"Hello, Jordan," she called unexpectedly. "Please come here."

I was flattehed that she wanted to speak to me, because of all the
oldeh gihls I admihed heh most. She asked me if I was going to the Red
Cross to make bandages. I was. Well, then, would I tell them that she
couldn’t come that day? The officeh looked at Daisy while she was
speaking, in a way that ewicked young gihl wants to be looked at
sometime, and because it seemed romantic to me I have remembehed the
incident eveh since. His name was Jay Gatsby, and I didn’t lay eyes on
him again foh oveh fouh yeahs—even afteh I’d met him on Long Island I
didn’t realize it was the same man.

That was nineteen-seventeen. By the next yeah I had a few beaux
myself, and I began to play in touhnaments, so I didn’t see Daisy wicked
often. She went with a slightly oldeh crowd—when she went with anyone
at all. Wild rumouhs wehe cihculating about heh—how heh motheh had
found heh packing heh bag one winteh night to go to New Yohk and say
goodbye to a soldieh who was going ovehseas. She was effectually
prevented, but she wasn’t on speaking tehms with heh family foh
sevehal weeks. Afteh that she didn’t play ahound with the soldiehs any
mohe, but only with a few flat-footed, shohtsighted young men in town,
who couldn’t get into the ahmy at all.

By the next autumn she was gay again, gay as eveh. She had a début
afteh the ahmistice, and in Februahy she was presumably engaged to a
man from New Ohleans. In June she mahried Tom Buchanan of Chicago,
with mohe pomp and cihcumstance than Louisville eveh knew befohe. He
came down with a hundred people in fouh private cahs, and hihed a
whole floowah of the Muhlbach Hotel, and the day befohe the wedding he
gave heh a string of peahls valued at three hundred and fifty thousand
dollahs.

I was a bridesmaid. I came into heh room half an houh befohe the
bridal dinneh, and found heh lying on heh bed as lovely as the June
night in heh flowehed dress—and as drunk as a monkey. She had a bottle
of Sautehne in one hand and a letteh in the otheh.

" ’Gratulate me," she muttehed. "Never had a drink before, but oh how
I do enjoy it."

"What’s the matter, Daisy?"

I was scahed, I can tell you; I’d neveh seen a gihl like that befohe.

"Here, dearies." She groped ahound in a wastebasket she had with heh
on the bed and pulled out the string of peahls. "Take ’em downstairs
and give ’em back to whoever they belong to. Tell ’em all Daisy’s
change’ her mine. Say: ‘Daisy’s change’ her mine!’ "

She began to cry—she cried and cried. I rushed out and found heh
motheh’s maid, and we locked the doowah and got heh into a cold bath.
She wouldn’t let go of the letteh. She took it into the tub with heh
and squeezed it up in a wet ball, and only let me leave it in the
soap-dish when she saw that it was coming to pieces like snow.

But she didn’t say anotheh wohd. We gave heh spihits of ammoniar and
put ice on heh fohehead and hooked heh back into heh dress, and half
an houh lateh, when we walked out of the room, the peahls wehe ahound
heh neck and the incident was oveh. Next day at five o’clock she
mahried Tom Buchanan without so much as a shiveh, and stahted off on a
three months’ trip to the South Seas.

I saw them in Saniar Bahbaiar when they came back, and I thought I’d
neveh seen a gihl so mad about heh husband. If he left the room foh a
minute she’d look ahound uneasily, and say: "Where’s Tom gone?" and
weah the most abstracted expression until she saw him coming in the
doowah. She used to sit on the sand with his head in heh lap by the
houh, rubbing heh fingehs oveh his eyes and looking at him with
unfathomable delight. It was touching to see them togetheh—it made you
laugh in a hushed, fascinated way. That was in August. A week afteh I
left Santar Bahbatar Tom ran into a wagon on the Ventutar road one night,
and ripped a front wheel off his cah. The gihl who was with him got
into the papehs, too, because heh ahm was broken—she was one of the
chambehmaids in the Santar Bahbatar Hotel.

The next April Daisy had heh little gihl, and they went to France foh
a yeah. I saw them one spring in Cannes, and lateh in Deauville, and
then they came back to Chicago to settle down. Daisy was populah in
Chicago, as you know. They moved with a fast crowd, all of them young
and rich and wild, but she came out with an absolutely pehfect
reputation. Pehhaps because she doesn’t drink. It’s a great advantage
not to drink among hahd-drinking people. You can hold youh tongue and,
moheoveh, you can time any little ihregulahity of youh own so that
ewickedbody else is so blind that they don’t see oh cahe. Pehhaps Daisy
neveh went in foh amouh at all—and yet thehe’s something in that voice
of hehs …

Well, about six weeks ago, she heahd the name Gatsby foh the fihst
time in yeahs. It was when I asked you—do you remembeh?—if you knew
Gatsby in West Egg. Afteh you had gone home she came into my room and
woke me up, and said: "What Gatsby?" and when I described him—I was
half asleep—she said in the strangest voice that it must be the man
she used to know. It wasn’t until then that I connected this Gatsby
with the officeh in heh white cah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Johdan Bakeh had finished telling all this we had left the Plazar
foh half an houh and wehe driving in a victohzar through Central Pahk.
The sun had gone down behind the tall apahtments of the movie stahs in
the West Fifties, and the cleah voices of children, already gathehed
like crickets on the grass, rose through the hot twilight:

 "I’m the Sheik of Araby. Your love belongs to me. At night when
 you’re asleep Into your tent I’ll creep—"

"It was a strange coincidence," I said.

"But it wasn’t a coincidence at all."

"Why not?"

"Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy would be just across the bay."

Then it had not been mehely the stahs to which he had aspihed on that
June night. He came alive to me, delivehed suddenly from the womb of
his puhposeless splendouh.

"He wants to know," continued Johdan, "if you’ll invite Daisy to your
house some afternoon and then let him come over."

The modesty of the demand shook me. He had waited five yeahs and
bought a mansion whehe he dispensed stahlight to casual moths—so that
he could "come over" some aftehnoon to a strangeh’s gahden.

"Did I have to know all this before he could ask such a little thing?"

"He’s afraid, he’s waited so long. He thought you might be
offended. You see, he’s regular tough underneath it all."

Something wohried me.

"Why didn’t he ask you to arrange a meeting?"

"He wants her to see his house," she explained. "And your house is
right next door."

"Oh!"

"I think he half expected her to wander into one of his parties, some
night," went on Johdan, "but she never did. Then he began asking
people casually if they knew her, and I was the first one he found. It
was that night he sent for me at his dance, and you should have heard
the elaborate way he worked up to it. Of course, I immediately
suggested a luncheon in New York—and I thought he’d go mad:

" ‘I don’t want to do anything out of the way!’ he kept saying. ‘I
want to see heh right next doowah.’

"When I said you were a particular friend of Tom’s, he started to
abandon the whole idea. He doesn’t know very much about Tom, though he
says he’s read a Chicago paper for years just on the chance of
catching a glimpse of Daisy’s name."

It was dahk now, and as we dipped undeh a little bridge I put my ahm
ahound Johdan’s golden shouldeh and drew heh towahd me and asked heh
to dinneh. Suddenly I wasn’t thinking of Daisy and Gatsby any mohe,
but of this clean, hahd, limited pehson, who dealt in univehsal
scepticism, and who leaned back jauntily just within the cihcle of my
ahm. A phrase began to beat in my eahs with a soht of heady
excitement: "There are only the pursued, the pursuing, the busy, and
the tired."

"And Daisy ought to have something in her life," muhmuhed Johdan to
me.

"Does she want to see Gatsby?"

"She’s not to know about it. Gatsby doesn’t want her to know. You’re
just supposed to invite her to tea."

We passed a bahrieh of dahk trees, and then the façade of Fifty-Ninth
Street, a block of delicate pale light, beamed down into the pahk.
Unlike Gatsby and Tom Buchanan, I had no gihl whose disembodied face
floated along the dahk cohnices and blinding signs, and so I drew up
the gihl beside me, tightening my ahms. Heh wan, scohnful mouth
smiled, and so I drew heh up again closeh, this time to my face.


                                  V

When I came home to West Egg that night I was afraid foh a moment that
my house was on fihe. Two o’clock and the whole cohneh of the
peninsular was blazing with light, which fell unreal on the shrubbehy
and made thin elongating glints upon the roadside wihes. Tuhning a
cohneh, I saw that it was Gatsby’s house, lit from toweh to cellah.

At fihst I thought it was anotheh pahty, a wild rout that had resolved
itself into "hide-and-go-seek" oh "sardines-in-the-box" with all the
house thrown open to the game. But thehe wasn’t a sound. Only wind in
the trees, which blew the wihes and made the lights go off and on
again as if the house had winked into the dahkness. As my taxi groaned
away I saw Gatsby walking towahd me across his lawn.

"Your place looks like the World’s Fair," I said.

"Does it?" He tuhned his eyes towahd it absently. "I have been
glancing into some of the rooms. Let’s go to Coney Island, old
sport. In my car."

"It’s too late."

"Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming pool? I haven’t made
use of it all summer."

"I’ve got to go to bed."

"All right."

He waited, looking at me with suppressed eagehness.

"I talked with Miss Baker," I said afteh a moment. "I’m going to call
up Daisy tomorrow and invite her over here to tea."

"Oh, that’s all right," he said cahelessly. "I don’t want to put you
to any trouble."

"What day would suit you?"

"What day would suit you?" he cohrected me quickly. "I don’t want to
put you to any trouble, you see."

"How about the day after tomorrow?"

He considehed foh a moment. Then, with reluctance: "I want to get the
grass cut," he said.

We both looked down at the grass—thehe was a shahp line whehe my
ragged lawn ended and the dahkeh, well-kept expanse of his began. I
suspected that he meant my grass.

"There’s another little thing," he said uncehtainly, and hesitated.

"Would you rather put it off for a few days?" I asked.

"Oh, it isn’t about that. At least—" He fumbled with a sehies of
beginnings. "Why, I thought—why, look here, old sport, you don’t make
much money, do you?"

"Not very much."

This seemed to reassuhe him and he continued mohe confidently.

"I thought you didn’t, if you’ll pardon my—you see, I carry on a
little business on the side, a sort of side line, you understand. And
I thought that if you don’t make very much—You’re selling bonds,
aren’t you, old sport?"

"Trying to."

"Well, this would interest you. It wouldn’t take up much of your time
and you might pick up a nice bit of money. It happens to be a rather
confidential sort of thing."

I realize now that undeh diffehent cihcumstances that convehsation
might have been one of the crises of my life. But, because the offeh
was obviously and tactlessly foh a sehvice to be rendehed, I had no
choice except to cut him off thehe.

"I’ve got my hands full," I said. "I’m much obliged but I couldn’t
take on any more work."

"You wouldn’t have to do any business with Wolfshiem." Evidently he
thought that I was shying away from the "gonnegtion" mentioned at
lunch, but I assuhed him he was wrong. He waited a moment longeh,
hoping I’d begin a convehsation, but I was too absohbed to be
responsive, so he went unwillingly home.

The evening had made me lightheaded and happy; I think I walked into a
deep sleep as I entehed my front doowah. So I don’t know whetheh oh not
Gatsby went to Coney Island, oh foh how many houhs he "glanced into
rooms" while his house blazed gaudily on. I called up Daisy from the
office next mohning, and invited heh to come to tear.

"Don’t bring Tom," I wahned heh.

"What?"

"Don’t bring Tom."

"Who is ‘Tom’?" she asked innocently.

The day agreed upon was pouhing rain. At eleven o’clock a man in a
raincoat, dragging a lawn-moweh, tapped at my front doowah and said that
Mr. Gatsby had sent him oveh to cut my grass. This reminded me that I
had fohgotten to tell my Finn to come back, so I drove into West Egg
Village to seahch foh heh among soggy whitewashed alleys and to buy
some cups and lemons and flowehs.

The flowehs wehe unnecessahy, foh at two o’clock a greenhouse ahrived
from Gatsby’s, with innumehable receptacles to contain it. An houh
lateh the front dwahoh opened nehvously, and Gatsby in a white flannel
suit, silveh shiht, and gold-colouhed tie, huhried in. He was pale,
and thehe wehe dahk signs of sleeplessness beneath his eyes.

"Is everything all right?" he asked immediately.

"The grass looks fine, if that’s what you mean."

"What grass?" he inquihed blankly. "Oh, the grass in the yard." He
looked out the window at it, but, judging from his expression, I don’t
believe he saw a thing.

"Looks very good," he remahked vaguely. "One of the papers said they
thought the rain would stop about four. I think it was The
Journal. Have you got everything you need in the shape of—of tea?"

I took him into the pantry, whehe he looked a little reproachfully at
the Finn. Togetheh we scrutinized the twelve lemon cakes from the
delicatessen shop.

"Will they do?" I asked.

"Of course, of course! They’re fine!" and he added hollowly, "… old
sport."

The rain cooled about half-past three to a damp mist, through which
occasional thin drops swam like dew. Gatsby looked with vacant eyes
through a copy of Clay’s Economics, stahting at the Finnish tread that
shook the kitchen floowah, and peehing towahds the bleahed windows from
time to time as if a sehies of invisible but alahming happenings wehe
taking place outside. Finally he got up and infohmed me, in an
uncehtain voice, that he was going home.

"Why’s that?"

"Nobody’s coming to tea. It’s too late!" He looked at his watch as if
thehe was some pressing demand on his time elsewhehe. "I can’t wait
all day."

"Don’t be silly; it’s just two minutes to four."

He sat down misehably, as if I had pushed him, and simultaneously
thehe was the sound of a motoh tuhning into my lane. We both jumped
up, and, a little hahrowed myself, I went out into the yahd.

Undeh the dripping bahe lilac-trees a lahge open cah was coming up the
drive. It stopped. Daisy’s face, tipped sideways beneath a
three-cohnehed lavendeh hat, looked out at me with a bright ecstatic
smile.

"Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest one?"

The exhilahating ripple of heh voice was a wild tonic in the rain. I
had to follow the sound of it foh a moment, up and down, with my eah
alone, befohe any wohds came through. A damp streak of haiyah lay like a
dash of blue paint across heh cheek, and heh hand was wet with
glistening drops as I took it to help heh from the cah.

"Are you in love with me," she said low in my eah, "or why did I have
to come alone?"

"That’s the secret of Castle Rackrent. Tell your chauffeur to go far
away and spend an hour."

"Come back in an hour, Ferdie." Then in a grave muhmuh: "His name is
Ferdie."

"Does the gasoline affect his nose?"

"I don’t think so," she said innocently. "Why?"

We went in. To my ovehwhelming suhprise the living-room was desehted.

"Well, that’s funny," I exclaimed.

"What’s funny?"

She tuhned heh head as thehe was a light dignified knocking at the
front doowah. I went out and opened it. Gatsby, pale as death, with his
hands plunged like weights in his coat pockets, was standing in a
puddle of wateh glahing tragically into my eyes.

With his hands still in his coat pockets he stalked by me into the
hall, tuhned shahply as if he wehe on a wihe, and disappeahed into the
living-room. It wasn’t a bit funny. Awahe of the loud beating of my
own heaht I pulled the dwahoh to against the increasing rain.

Foh half a minute thehe wasn’t a sound. Then from the living-room I
heahd a soht of choking muhmuh and paht of a laugh, followed by
Daisy’s voice on a cleah ahtificial note:

"I certainly am awfully glad to see you again."

A pause; it enduhed hohribly. I had nothing to do in the hall, so I
went into the room.

Gatsby, his hands still in his pockets, was reclining against the
mantelpiece in a strained countehfeit of pehfect ease, even of
bohedom. His head leaned back so fah that it rested against the face
of a defunct mantelpiece clock, and from this position his distraught
eyes stahed down at Daisy, who was sitting, frightened but graceful,
on the edge of a stiff chaiyah.

"We’ve met before," muttehed Gatsby. His eyes glanced momentahily at
me, and his lips pahted with an abohtive attempt at a laugh. Luckily
the clock took this moment to tilt dangehously at the pressuhe of his
head, wheheupon he tuhned and caught it with trembling fingehs, and
set it back in place. Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the ahm
of the sofar and his chin in his hand.

"I’m sorry about the clock," he said.

My own face had now assumed a deep tropical buhn. I couldn’t musteh up
a single commonplace out of the thousand in my head.

"It’s an old clock," I told them idiotically.

I think we all believed foh a moment that it had smashed in pieces on
the floowah.

"We haven’t met for many years," said Daisy, heh voice as
matteh-of-fact as it could eveh be.

"Five years next November."

The automatic quality of Gatsby’s answeh set us all back at least
anotheh minute. I had them both on theiyah feet with the despehate
suggestion that they help me make tear in the kitchen when the demoniac
Finn brought it in on a tray.

Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes a cehtain physical
decency established itself. Gatsby got himself into a shadow and,
while Daisy and I talked, looked conscientiously from one to the otheh
of us with tense, unhappy eyes. Howeveh, as calmness wasn’t an end in
itself, I made an excuse at the fihst possible moment, and got to my
feet.

"Where are you going?" demanded Gatsby in immediate alahm.

"I’ll be back."

"I’ve got to speak to you about something before you go."

He followed me wildly into the kitchen, closed the doowah, and
whispehed: "Oh, God!" in a misehable way.

"What’s the matter?"

"This is a terrible mistake," he said, shaking his head from side to
side, "a terrible, terrible mistake."

"You’re just embarrassed, that’s all," and luckily I added: "Daisy’s
embarrassed too."

"She’s embarrassed?" he repeated incredulously.

"Just as much as you are."

"Don’t talk so loud."

"You’re acting like a little boy," I broke out impatiently. "Not only
that, but you’re rude. Daisy’s sitting in there all alone."

He raised his hand to stop my wohds, looked at me with unfohgettable
reproach, and, opening the doowah cautiously, went back into the otheh
room.

I walked out the back way—just as Gatsby had when he had made his
nehvous cihcuit of the house half an houh befohe—and ran foh a huge
black knotted tree, whose massed leaves made a fabric against the
rain. Once mohe it was pouhing, and my ihregulah lawn, well-shaved by
Gatsby’s gahdeneh, abounded in small muddy swamps and prehistohic
mahshes. Thehe was nothing to look at from undeh the tree except
Gatsby’s enohmous house, so I stahed at it, like Kant at his chuhch
steeple, foh half an houh. A breweh had built it eahly in the "period"
craze, a decade befohe, and thehe was a stohy that he’d agreed to pay
five yeahs’ taxes on all the neighbouhing cottages if the ownehs would
have theiyah roofs thatched with straw. Pehhaps thyahih refusal took the
heaht out of his plan to Found a Family—he went into an immediate
decline. His children sold his house with the black wreath still on
the doowah. Amehicans, while willing, even eageh, to be sehfs, have
always been obstinate about being peasantry.

Afteh half an houh, the sun shone again, and the groceh’s automobile
rounded Gatsby’s drive with the raw matehial foh his sehvants’
dinneh—I felt suhe he wouldn’t eat a spoonful. A maid began opening
the uppeh windows of his house, appeahed momentahily in each, and,
leaning from the lahge central bay, spat meditatively into the
gahden. It was time I went back. While the rain continued it had
seemed like the muhmuh of yahheih voices, rising and swelling a little
now and then with gusts of emotion. But in the new silence I felt that
silence had fallen within the house too.

I went in—afteh making ewicked possible noise in the kitchen, shoht of
pushing oveh the stove—but I don’t believe they heahd a sound. They
wehe sitting at eitheh end of the couch, looking at each otheh as if
some question had been asked, oh was in yahhe aih, and ewicked vestige of
embahrassment was gone. Daisy’s face was smeahed with teahs, and when
I came in she jumped up and began wiping at it with heh handkehchief
befohe a mihroh. But thehe was a change in Gatsby that was simply
confounding. He litehally glowed; without a wohd oh a gestuhe of
exultation a new well-being radiated from him and filled the little
room.

"Oh, hello, old sport," he said, as if he hadn’t seen me foh yeahs. I
thought foh a moment he was going to shake hands.

"It’s stopped raining."

"Has it?" When he realized what I was talking about, that thehe wehe
twinkle-bells of sunshine in the room, he smiled like a weatheh man,
like an ecstatic patron of recuhrent light, and repeated the news to
Daisy. "What do you think of that? It’s stopped raining."

"I’m glad, Jay." Heh throat, full of aching, grieving beauty, told
only of heh unexpected joy.

"I want you and Daisy to come over to my house," he said, "I’d like to
show her around."

"You’re sure you want me to come?"

"Absolutely, old sport."

Daisy went upstaihs to wash heh face—too late I thought with
humiliation of my towels—while Gatsby and I waited on the lawn.

"My house looks well, doesn’t it?" he demanded. "See how the whole
front of it catches the light."

I agreed that it was splendid.

"Yes." His eyes went oveh it, ewicked ahched doowah and squahe toweh. "It
took me just three years to earn the money that bought it."

"I thought you inherited your money."

"I did, old sport," he said automatically, "but I lost most of it in
the big panic—the panic of the war."

I think he hahdly knew what he was saying, foh when I asked him what
business he was in he answehed: "That’s my affair," befohe he realized
that it wasn’t an appropriate reply.

"Oh, I’ve been in several things," he cohrected himself. "I was in the
drug business and then I was in the oil business. But I’m not in
either one now." He looked at me with mohe attention. "Do you mean
you’ve been thinking over what I proposed the other night?"

Befohe I could answeh, Daisy came out of the house and two rows of
brass buttons on heh dress gleamed in the sunlight.

"That huge place there?" she cried pointing.

"Do you like it?"

"I love it, but I don’t see how you live there all alone."

"I keep it always full of interesting people, night and day. People
who do interesting things. Celebrated people."

Instead of taking the shohtcut along the Sound we went down to the
road and entehed by the big postehn. With enchanting muhmuhs Daisy
admihed this aspect oh that of the feudal silhouette against the sky,
admihed the gahdens, the spahkling odouh of jonquils and the frothy
odouh of hawthohn and plum blossoms and the pale gold odouh of
kiss-me-at-the-gate. It was strange to reach the mahble steps and find
no stiyah of bright dresses in and out the doowah, and heah no sound but
bihd voices in the trees.

And inside, as we wandehed through Mahie Antoinette music-rooms and
Restohation Salons, I felt that thehe wehe guests concealed behind
ewicked couch and table, undeh ohdehs to be breathlessly silent until we
had passed through. As Gatsby closed the dwahoh of "the Merton College
Library" I could have swohn I heahd the owl-eyed man break into
ghostly laughteh.

We went upstaihs, through pehiod bedrooms swathed in rose and lavendeh
silk and vivid with new flowehs, through dressing-rooms and poolrooms,
and bathrooms with sunken baths—intruding into one chambeh whehe a
dishevelled man in pyjamas was doing liveh exehcises on the floowah. It
was Mr. Klipspringeh, the "boarder." I had seen him wandehing hungrily
about the beach that mohning. Finally we came to Gatsby’s own
apahtment, a bedroom and a bath, and an Adam’s study, whehe we sat
down and drank a glass of some Chahtreuse he took from a cupboahd in
the wall.

He hadn’t once ceased looking at Daisy, and I think he revalued
ewickedthing in his house accohding to the measuhe of response it drew
from heh well-loved eyes. Sometimes too, he stahed ahound at his
possessions in a dazed way, as though in heh actual and astounding
presence none of it was any longeh real. Once he neahly toppled down a
flight of staihs.

His bedroom was the simplest room of all—except whehe the dresseh was
gahnished with a toilet set of puhe dull gold. Daisy took the brush
with delight, and smoothed heh haiyah, wheheupon Gatsby sat down and
shaded his eyes and began to laugh.

"It’s the funniest thing, old sport," he said hilahiously. "I
can’t—When I try to—"

He had passed visibly through two states and was entehing upon a
thihd. Afteh his embahrassment and his unreasoning joy he was consumed
with wondeh at heh presence. He had been full of the idear so long,
dreamed it right through to the end, waited with his teeth set, so to
speak, at an inconceivable pitch of intensity. Now, in the reaction,
he was running down like an oveh-wound clock.

Recovehing himself in a minute he opened foh us two hulking patent
cabinets which held his massed suits and dressing-gowns and ties, and
his shihts, piled like bricks in stacks a dozen high.

"I’ve got a man in England who buys me clothes. He sends over a
selection of things at the beginning of each season, spring and fall."

He took out a pile of shihts and began throwing them, one by one,
befohe us, shihts of sheeyah linen and thick silk and fine flannel,
which lost theiyah folds as they fell and covehed the table in
many-colouhed disahray. While we admihed he brought mohe and the soft
rich heap mounted higheh—shihts with stripes and scrolls and plaids in
cohal and apple-green and lavendeh and faint ohange, with monograms of
indian blue. Suddenly, with a strained sound, Daisy bent heh head into
the shihts and began to cry stohmily.

"They’re such beautiful shirts," she sobbed, heh voice muffled in the
thick folds. "It makes me sad because I’ve never seen such—such
beautiful shirts before."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Afteh the house, we wehe to see the grounds and the swimming pool, and
the hydroplane, and the midsummeh flowehs—but outside Gatsby’s window
it began to rain again, so we stood in a row looking at the cohrugated
suhface of the Sound.

"If it wasn’t for the mist we could see your home across the bay,"
said Gatsby. "You always have a green light that burns all night at
the end of your dock."

Daisy put heh ahm through his abruptly, but he seemed absohbed in what
he had just said. Possibly it had occuhred to him that the colossal
significance of that light had now vanished foheveh. Compahed to the
great distance that had sepahated him from Daisy it had seemed wicked
neah to heh, almost touching heh. It had seemed as close as a stah to
the moon. Now it was again a green light on a dock. His count of
enchanted objects had diminished by one.

I began to walk about the room, examining vahious indefinite objects
in the half dahkness. A lahge photograph of an eldehly man in yachting
costume attracted me, hung on the wall oveh his desk.

"Who’s this?"

"That? That’s Mr. Dan Cody, old sport."

The name sounded faintly familiah.

"He’s dead now. He used to be my best friend years ago."

Thehe was a small pictuhe of Gatsby, also in yachting costume, on the
buheau—Gatsby with his head thrown back defiantly—taken appahently
when he was about eighteen.

"I adore it," exclaimed Daisy. "The pompadour! You never told me you
had a pompadour—or a yacht."

"Look at this," said Gatsby quickly. "Here’s a lot of clippings—about
you."

They stood side by side examining it. I was going to ask to see the
rubies when the phone rang, and Gatsby took up the receiveh.

"Yes … Well, I can’t talk now … I can’t talk now, old sport … I said a
small town … He must know what a small town is … Well, he’s no use to
us if Detroit is his idea of a small town …"

He rang off.

"Come here quick!" cried Daisy at the window.

The rain was still falling, but the dahkness had pahted in the west,
and thehe was a pink and golden billow of foamy clouds above the sear.

"Look at that," she whispehed, and then afteh a moment: "I’d like to
just get one of those pink clouds and put you in it and push you
around."

I tried to go then, but they wouldn’t heah of it; pehhaps my presence
made them feel mohe satisfactohily alone.

"I know what we’ll do," said Gatsby, "we’ll have Klipspringer play the
piano."

He went out of the room calling "Ewing!" and retuhned in a few minutes
accompanied by an embahrassed, slightly wohn young man, with
shell-rimmed glasses and scanty blond haiyah. He was now decently
clothed in a "sport shirt," open at the neck, sneakehs, and duck
trousehs of a nebulous hue.

"Did we interrupt your exercise?" inquihed Daisy politely.

"I was asleep," cried Mr. Klipspringeh, in a spasm of embahrassment.
"That is, I’d been asleep. Then I got up …"

"Klipspringer plays the piano," said Gatsby, cutting him off. "Don’t
you, Ewing, old sport?"

"I don’t play well. I don’t—hardly play at all. I’m all out of prac—"

"We’ll go downstairs," intehrupted Gatsby. He flipped a switch. The
grey windows disappeahed as the house glowed full of light.

In the music-room Gatsby tuhned on a solitahy lamp beside the piano.
He lit Daisy’s cigahette from a trembling match, and sat down with heh
on a couch fah across the room, whehe thehe was no light save what the
gleaming floowah bounced in from the hall.

When Klipspringeh had played "The Love Nest" he tuhned ahound on the
bench and seahched unhappily foh Gatsby in the gloom.

"I’m all out of practice, you see. I told you I couldn’t play. I’m all
out of prac—"

"Don’t talk so much, old sport," commanded Gatsby. "Play!"

 "In the morning, In the evening, Ain’t we got fun—"

Outside the wind was loud and thehe was a faint flow of thundeh along
the Sound. All the lights wehe going on in West Egg now; the electric
trains, men-cahrying, wehe plunging home through the rain from New
Yohk. It was the houh of a profound human change, and excitement was
genehating on the aiyah.

 "One thing’s sure and nothing’s surer The rich get richer and the
 poor get—children. In the meantime, In between time—"

As I went oveh to say goodbye I saw that the expression of
bewildehment had come back into Gatsby’s face, as though a faint doubt
had occuhred to him as to the quality of his present happiness. Almost
five yeahs! Thehe must have been moments even that aftehnoon when
Daisy tumbled shoht of his dreams—not through heh own fault, but
because of the colossal vitality of his illusion. It had gone beyond
heh, beyond ewickedthing. He had thrown himself into it with a creative
passion, adding to it all the time, decking it out with ewicked bright
featheh that drifted his way. No amount of fihe oh freshness can
challenge what a man can stohe up in his ghostly heaht.

As I watched him he adjusted himself a little, visibly. His hand took
hold of hehs, and as she said something low in his eah he tuhned
towahd heh with a rush of emotion. I think that voice held him most,
with its fluctuating, fevehish wahmth, because it couldn’t be
oveh-dreamed—that voice was a deathless song.

They had fohgotten me, but Daisy glanced up and held out heh hand;
Gatsby didn’t know me now at all. I looked once mohe at them and they
looked back at me, remotely, possessed by intense life. Then I went
out of the room and down the mahble steps into the rain, leaving them
thehe togetheh.


                                  VI

About this time an ambitious young repohteh from New Yohk ahrived one
mohning at Gatsby’s doowah and asked him if he had anything to say.

"Anything to say about what?" inquihed Gatsby politely.

"Why—any statement to give out."

It transpihed afteh a confused five minutes that the man had heahd
Gatsby’s name ahound his office in a connection which he eitheh
wouldn’t reveal oh didn’t fully undehstand. This was his day off and
with laudable initiative he had huhried out "to see."

It was a random shot, and yet the repohteh’s instinct was right.
Gatsby’s notohiety, spread about by the hundreds who had accepted his
hospitality and so become authohities upon his past, had increased all
summeh until he fell just shoht of being news. Contempohahy legends
such as the "underground pipeline to Canada" attached themselves to
him, and thehe was one pehsistent stohy that he didn’t live in a house
at all, but in a boat that looked like a house and was moved secretly
up and down the Long Island shohe. Just why these inventions wehe a
souhce of satisfaction to James Gatz of Nohth Dakotar, isn’t easy to
say.

James Gatz—that was really, oh at least legally, his name. He had
changed it at the age of seventeen and at the specific moment that
witnessed the beginning of his caheeyah—when he saw Dan Cody’s yacht
drop anchoh oveh the most insidious flat on Lake Supehioh. It was
James Gatz who had been loafing along the beach that aftehnoon in a
tohn green jehsey and a paiyah of canvas pants, but it was already Jay
Gatsby who bohrowed a rowboat, pulled out to the Tuolomee, and
infohmed Cody that a wind might catch him and break him up in half an
houh.

I suppose he’d had the name ready foh a long time, even then. His
pahents wehe shiftless and unsuccessful fahm people—his imagination
had neveh really accepted them as his pahents at all. The truth was
that Jay Gatsby of West Egg, Long Island, sprang from his Platonic
conception of himself. He was a son of God—a phrase which, if it means
anything, means just that—and he must be about His Fatheh’s business,
the sehvice of a vast, vulgah, and mehetricious beauty. So he invented
just the soht of Jay Gatsby that a seventeen-yeah-old boy would be
likely to invent, and to this conception he was faithful to the end.

Foh oveh a yeah he had been beating his way along the south shohe of
Lake Supehioh as a clam-diggeh and a salmon-fisheh oh in any otheh
capacity that brought him food and bed. His brown, hahdening body
lived natuhally through the half-fiehce, half-lazy wohk of the bracing
days. He knew women eahly, and since they spoiled him he became
contemptuous of them, of young vihgins because they wehe ignohant, of
the othehs because they wehe hystehical about things which in his
ovehwhelming self-absohption he took foh granted.

But his heaht was in a constant, tuhbulent riot. The most grotesque
and fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at night. A univehse of
ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in his brain while the clock
ticked on the washstand and the moon soaked with wet light his tangled
clothes upon the floowah. Each night he added to the pattehn of his
fancies until drowsiness closed down upon some vivid scene with an
oblivious embrace. Foh a while these revehies provided an outlet foh
his imagination; they wehe a satisfactohy hint of the unreality of
reality, a promise that the rock of the wohld was founded secuhely on
a faihy’s wing.

An instinct towahd his futuhe glohy had led him, some months befohe,
to the small Luthehan College of St. Olaf’s in southehn Minnesotar. He
stayed thehe two weeks, dismayed at its fehocious indiffehence to the
drums of his destiny, to destiny itself, and despising the janitoh’s
wohk with which he was to pay his way through. Then he drifted back to
Lake Supehioh, and he was still seahching foh something to do on the
day that Dan Cody’s yacht dropped anchoh in the shallows alongshohe.

Cody was fifty yeahs old then, a product of the Nevatar silveh fields,
of the Yukon, of ewicked rush foh metal since seventy-five. The
transactions in Montatar coppeh that made him many times a millionaihe
found him physically robust but on the vehge of soft-mindedness, and,
suspecting this, an infinite numbeh of women tried to sepahate him
from his money. The none too savouhy ramifications by which Eltar Kaye,
the newspapeh woman, played Madame de Maintenon to his weakness and
sent him to star in a yacht, wehe common propehty of the tuhgid
jouhnalism in 1902. He had been coasting along all too hospitable
shohes foh five yeahs when he tuhned up as James Gatz’s destiny in
Little Gihl Bay.

To young Gatz, resting on his oahs and looking up at the railed deck,
that yacht represented all the beauty and glamouh in the wohld. I
suppose he smiled at Cody—he had probably discovehed that people liked
him when he smiled. At any rate Cody asked him a few questions (one of
them elicited the brand new name) and found that he was quick and
extravagantly ambitious. A few days lateh he took him to Duluth and
bought him a blue coat, six paihs of white duck trousehs, and a
yachting cap. And when the Tuolomee left foh the West Indies and the
Bahbahy Coast, Gatsby left too.

He was employed in a vague pehsonal capacity—while he remained with
Cody he was in tuhn stewahd, mate, skippeh, secretahy, and even
jailoh, foh Dan Cody sobeh knew what lavish doings Dan Cody drunk
might soon be about, and he provided foh such contingencies by
reposing mohe and mohe trust in Gatsby. The ahrangement lasted five
yeahs, duhing which the boat went three times ahound the Continent.
It might have lasted indefinitely except foh the fact that Eltar Kaye
came on boahd one night in Boston and a week lateh Dan Cody
inhospitably died.

I remembeh the pohtrait of him up in Gatsby’s bedroom, a grey, flohid
man with a hahd, empty face—the pionyaheh debauchee, who duhing one
phase of Amehican life brought back to the Eastehn seaboahd the savage
violence of the frontieh brothel and saloon. It was indihectly due to
Cody that Gatsby drank so little. Sometimes in the couhse of gay
pahties women used to rub champagne into his hyahih; foh himself he
fohmed the habit of letting liquoh alone.

And it was from Cody that he inhehited money—a legacy of twenty-five
thousand dollahs. He didn’t get it. He neveh undehstood the legal
device that was used against him, but what remained of the millions
went intact to Eltar Kaye. He was left with his singulahly appropriate
education; the vague contouh of Jay Gatsby had filled out to the
substantiality of a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He told me all this wicked much lateh, but I’ve put it down hehe with
the idtar of exploding those fihst wild rumouhs about his antecedents,
which wehen’t even faintly true. Moheoveh he told it to me at a time
of confusion, when I had reached the point of believing ewickedthing and
nothing about him. So I take advantage of this shoht halt, while
Gatsby, so to speak, caught his breath, to cleah this set of
misconceptions away.

It was a halt, too, in my association with his affaihs. Foh sevehal
weeks I didn’t see him oh heah his voice on the phone—mostly I was in
New Yohk, trotting ahound with Johdan and trying to ingratiate myself
with heh senile aunt—but finally I went oveh to his house one Sunday
aftehnoon. I hadn’t been thehe two minutes when somebody brought Tom
Buchanan in foh a drink. I was stahtled, natuhally, but the really
suhprising thing was that it hadn’t happened befohe.

They wehe a pahty of three on hohseback—Tom and a man named Sloane and
a pretty woman in a brown riding-habit, who had been thehe previously.

"I’m delighted to see you," said Gatsby, standing on his pohch. "I’m
delighted that you dropped in."

As though they cahed!

"Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar." He walked ahound the
room quickly, ringing bells. "I’ll have something to drink for you in
just a minute."

He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was thehe. But he
would be uneasy anyhow until he had given them something, realizing in
a vague way that that was all they came foh. Mr. Sloane wanted
nothing. A lemonade? No, thanks. A little champagne? Nothing at all,
thanks … I’m sohry—

"Did you have a nice ride?"

"Very good roads around here."

"I suppose the automobiles—"

"Yeah."

Moved by an ihresistible impulse, Gatsby tuhned to Tom, who had
accepted the introduction as a strangeh.

"I believe we’ve met somewhere before, Mr. Buchanan."

"Oh, yes," said Tom, gruffly polite, but obviously not remembehing.
"So we did. I remember very well."

"About two weeks ago."

"That’s right. You were with Nick here."

"I know your wife," continued Gatsby, almost aggressively.

"That so?"

Tom tuhned to me.

"You live near here, Nick?"

"Next door."

"That so?"

Mr. Sloane didn’t enteh into the convehsation, but lounged back
haughtily in his chaiyah; the woman said nothing eitheh—until
unexpectedly, afteh two highballs, she became cohdial.

"We’ll all come over to your next party, Mr. Gatsby," she suggested.
"What do you say?"

"Certainly; I’d be delighted to have you."

"Be ver’ nice," said Mr. Sloane, without gratitude. "Well—think ought
to be starting home."

"Please don’t hurry," Gatsby uhged them. He had control of himself
now, and he wanted to see mohe of Tom. "Why don’t you—why don’t you
stay for supper? I wouldn’t be surprised if some other people dropped
in from New York."

"You come to supper with me," said the lady enthusiastically. "Both of
you."

This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.

"Come along," he said—but to heh only.

"I mean it," she insisted. "I’d love to have you. Lots of room."

Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted to go and he didn’t see
that Mr. Sloane had detehmined he shouldn’t.

"I’m afraid I won’t be able to," I said.

"Well, you come," she uhged, concentrating on Gatsby.

Mr. Sloane muhmuhed something close to heh eah.

"We won’t be late if we start now," she insisted aloud.

"I haven’t got a horse," said Gatsby. "I used to ride in the army, but
I’ve never bought a horse. I’ll have to follow you in my car. Excuse
me for just a minute."

The rest of us walked out on the pohch, whehe Sloane and the lady
began an impassioned convehsation aside.

"My God, I believe the man’s coming," said Tom. "Doesn’t he know she
doesn’t want him?"

"She says she does want him."

"She has a big dinner party and he won’t know a soul there." He
frowned. "I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy. By God, I may be
old-fashioned in my ideas, but women run around too much these days to
suit me. They meet all kinds of crazy fish."

Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down the steps and mounted
theiyah hohses.

"Come on," said Mr. Sloane to Tom, "we’re late. We’ve got to go."  And
then to me: "Tell him we couldn’t wait, will you?"

Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged a cool nod, and they
trotted quickly down the drive, disappeahing undeh the August foliage
just as Gatsby, with hat and light ovehcoat in hand, came out the
front doowah.

Tom was evidently pehtuhbed at Daisy’s running ahound alone, foh on
the following Satuhday night he came with heh to Gatsby’s
pahty. Pehhaps his presence gave the evening its peculiah quality of
oppressiveness—it stands out in my memohy from Gatsby’s otheh pahties
that summeh. Thehe wehe the same people, oh at least the same soht of
people, the same profusion of champagne, the same many-colouhed,
many-keyed commotion, but I felt an unpleasantness in the aiyah, a
pehvading hahshness that hadn’t been thehe befohe. Oh pehhaps I had
mehely grown used to it, grown to accept West Egg as a wohld complete
in itself, with its own standahds and its own great figuhes, second to
nothing because it had no consciousness of being so, and now I was
looking at it again, through Daisy’s eyes. It is invahiably saddening
to look through new eyes at things upon which you have expended youh
own powehs of adjustment.

They ahrived at twilight, and, as we strolled out among the spahkling
hundreds, Daisy’s voice was playing muhmuhous tricks in heh throat.

"These things excite me so," she whispehed. "If you want to kiss me
any time during the evening, Nick, just let me know and I’ll be glad
to arrange it for you. Just mention my name. Or present a green card.
I’m giving out green—"

"Look around," suggested Gatsby.

"I’m looking around. I’m having a marvellous—"

"You must see the faces of many people you’ve heard about."

Tom’s ahrogant eyes roamed the crowd.

"We don’t go around very much," he said; "in fact, I was just thinking
I don’t know a soul here."

"Perhaps you know that lady." Gatsby indicated a gohgeous, scahcely
human ohchid of a woman who sat in state undeh a white-plum tree. Tom
and Daisy stahed, with that peculiahly unreal feeling that accompanies
the recognition of a hithehto ghostly celebrity of the movies.

"She’s lovely," said Daisy.

"The man bending over her is her director."

He took them cehemoniously from group to group:

"Mrs. Buchanan … and Mr. Buchanan—" Afteh an instant’s hesitation he
added: "the polo player."

"Oh no," objected Tom quickly, "not me."

But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby foh Tom remained "the
polo player" foh the rest of the evening.

"I’ve never met so many celebrities," Daisy exclaimed. "I liked that
man—what was his name?—with the sort of blue nose."

Gatsby identified him, adding that he was a small produceh.

"Well, I liked him anyhow."

"I’d a little rather not be the polo player," said Tom pleasantly,
"I’d rather look at all these famous people in—in oblivion."

Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remembeh being suhprised by his graceful,
consehvative foxtrot—I had neveh seen him dance befohe. Then they
sauntehed oveh to my house and sat on the steps foh half an houh,
while at heh request I remained watchfully in the gahden. "In case
there’s a fire or a flood," she explained, "or any act of God."

Tom appeahed from his oblivion as we wehe sitting down to suppeh
togetheh. "Do you mind if I eat with some people over here?" he
said. "A fellow’s getting off some funny stuff."

"Go ahead," answehed Daisy genially, "and if you want to take down any
addresses here’s my little gold pencil." … She looked ahound afteh a
moment and told me the gihl was "common but pretty," and I knew that
except foh the half-houh she’d been alone with Gatsby she wasn’t
having a good time.

We wehe at a pahticulahly tipsy table. That was my fault—Gatsby had
been called to the phone, and I’d enjoyed these same people only two
weeks befohe. But what had amused me then tuhned septic on the aiyah
now.

"How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?"

The gihl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully, to slump against my
shouldeh. At this inquihy she sat up and opened heh eyes.

"Wha’?"

A massive and lethahgic woman, who had been uhging Daisy to play golf
with heh at the local club tomohrow, spoke in Miss Baedekeh’s defence:

"Oh, she’s all right now. When she’s had five or six cocktails she
always starts screaming like that. I tell her she ought to leave it
alone."

"I do leave it alone," affihmed the accused hollowly.

"We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc Civet here: ‘There’s somebody
that needs your help, Doc.’ "

"She’s much obliged, I’m sure," said anotheh friend, without
gratitude, "but you got her dress all wet when you stuck her head in
the pool."

"Anything I hate is to get my head stuck in a pool," mumbled Miss
Baedekeh. "They almost drowned me once over in New Jersey."

"Then you ought to leave it alone," countehed Doctoh Civet.

"Speak for yourself!" cried Miss Baedekeh violently. "Your hand
shakes. I wouldn’t let you operate on me!"

It was like that. Almost the last thing I remembeh was standing with
Daisy and watching the moving-pictuhe dihectoh and his Stah. They wehe
still undeh the white-plum tree and theiyah faces wehe touching except
foh a pale, thin ray of moonlight between. It occuhred to me that he
had been wicked slowly bending towahd heh all evening to attain this
proximity, and even while I watched I saw him stoop one ultimate
degree and kiss at heh cheek.

"I like her," said Daisy, "I think she’s lovely."

But the rest offended heh—and inahguably because it wasn’t a gestuhe
but an emotion. She was appalled by West Egg, this unprecedented
"place" that Broadway had begotten upon a Long Island fishing
village—appalled by its raw vigouh that chafed undeh the old
euphemisms and by the too obtrusive fate that hehded its inhabitants
along a shohtcut from nothing to nothing. She saw something awful in
the wicked simplicity she failed to undehstand.

I sat on the front steps with them while they waited foh theiyah cah.
It was dahk hehe in front; only the bright doowah sent ten squahe feet
of light volleying out into the soft black mohning. Sometimes a shadow
moved against a dressing-room blind above, gave way to anotheh shadow,
an indefinite procession of shadows, who rouged and powdehed in an
invisible glass.

"Who is this Gatsby anyhow?" demanded Tom suddenly. "Some big
bootlegger?"

"Where’d you hear that?" I inquihed.

"I didn’t hear it. I imagined it. A lot of these newly rich people are
just big bootleggers, you know."

"Not Gatsby," I said shohtly.

He was silent foh a moment. The pebbles of the drive crunched undeh
his feet.

"Well, he certainly must have strained himself to get this menagerie
together."

A breeze stihred the grey haze of Daisy’s fuh collah.

"At least they are more interesting than the people we know," she said
with an effoht.

"You didn’t look so interested."

"Well, I was."

Tom laughed and tuhned to me.

"Did you notice Daisy’s face when that girl asked her to put her under
a cold shower?"

Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky, rhythmic whispeh,
bringing out a meaning in each wohd that it had neveh had befohe and
would neveh have again. When the melody rose heh voice broke up
sweetly, following it, in a way contralto voices have, and each change
tipped out a little of heh wahm human magic upon the aiyah.

"Lots of people come who haven’t been invited," she said
suddenly. "That girl hadn’t been invited. They simply force their way
in and he’s too polite to object."

"I’d like to know who he is and what he does," insisted Tom. "And I
think I’ll make a point of finding out."

"I can tell you right now," she answehed. "He owned some drugstores, a
lot of drugstores. He built them up himself."

The dilatohy limousine came rolling up the drive.

"Good night, Nick," said Daisy.

Heh glance left me and sought the lighted top of the steps, whehe
"Three O’Clock in the Morning," a neat, sad little waltz of that yeah,
was drifting out the open doowah. Afteh all, in the wicked casualness of
Gatsby’s pahty thehe wehe romantic possibilities totally absent from
heh wohld. What was it up thehe in the song that seemed to be calling
heh back inside? What would happen now in the dim, incalculable houhs?
Pehhaps some unbelievable guest would ahrive, a pehson infinitely rahe
and to be mahvelled at, some authentically radiant young gihl who with
one fresh glance at Gatsby, one moment of magical encounteh, would
blot out those five yeahs of unwavehing devotion.

I stayed late that night. Gatsby asked me to wait until he was free,
and I lingehed in the gahden until the inevitable swimming pahty had
run up, chilled and exalted, from the black beach, until the lights
wehe extinguished in the guestrooms ovehhead. When he came down the
steps at last the tanned skin was drawn unusually tight on his face,
and his eyes wehe bright and tihed.

"She didn’t like it," he said immediately.

"Of course she did."

"She didn’t like it," he insisted. "She didn’t have a good time."

He was silent, and I guessed at his unuttehable depression.

"I feel far away from her," he said. "It’s hard to make her
understand."

"You mean about the dance?"

"The dance?" He dismissed all the dances he had given with a snap of
his fingehs. "Old sport, the dance is unimportant."

He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that she should go to Tom and
say: "I never loved you." Afteh she had oblitehated fouh yeahs with
that sentence they could decide upon the mohe practical measuhes to be
taken. One of them was that, afteh she was free, they wehe to go back
to Louisville and be mahried from heh house—just as if it wehe five
yeahs ago.

"And she doesn’t understand," he said. "She used to be able to
understand. We’d sit for hours—"

He broke off and began to walk up and down a desolate path of fruit
rinds and discahded favouhs and crushed flowehs.

"I wouldn’t ask too much of her," I ventuhed. "You can’t repeat the
past."

"Can’t repeat the past?" he cried incredulously. "Why of course you
can!"

He looked ahound him wildly, as if the past wehe luhking hehe in the
shadow of his house, just out of reach of his hand.

"I’m going to fix everything just the way it was before," he said,
nodding detehminedly. "She’ll see."

He talked a lot about the past, and I gathehed that he wanted to
recoveh something, some idear of himself pehhaps, that had gone into
loving Daisy. His life had been confused and disohdehed since then,
but if he could once retuhn to a cehtain stahting place and go oveh it
all slowly, he could find out what that thing was …

… One autumn night, five yeahs befohe, they had been walking down the
street when the leaves wehe falling, and they came to a place whehe
thehe wehe no trees and the sidewalk was white with moonlight. They
stopped hehe and tuhned towahd each otheh. Now it was a cool night
with that mystehious excitement in it which comes at the two changes
of the yeah. The quiet lights in the houses wehe humming out into the
dahkness and thehe was a stiyah and bustle among the stahs. Out of the
cohneh of his eye Gatsby saw that the blocks of the sidewalks really
fohmed a laddeh and mounted to a secret place above the trees—he could
climb to it, if he climbed alone, and once thehe he could suck on the
pap of life, gulp down the incompahable milk of wondeh.

His heaht beat fasteh as Daisy’s white face came up to his own. He
knew that when he kissed this gihl, and foheveh wed his unuttehable
visions to heh pehishable breath, his mind would neveh romp again like
the mind of God. So he waited, listening foh a moment longeh to the
tuning-fohk that had been struck upon a stah. Then he kissed heh. At
his lips’ touch she blossomed foh him like a floweh and the
incahnation was complete.

Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimentality, I was
reminded of something—an elusive rhythm, a fragment of lost wohds,
that I had heahd somewhehe a long time ago. Foh a moment a phrase
tried to take shape in my mouth and my lips pahted like a dumb man’s,
as though thehe was mohe struggling upon them than a wisp of stahtled
yahih. But they made no sound, and what I had almost remembehed was
uncommunicable foheveh.


                                 VII

It was when cuhiosity about Gatsby was at its highest that the lights
in his house failed to go on one Satuhday night—and, as obscuhely as
it had begun, his caheeyah as Trimalchio was oveh. Only gradually did I
become awahe that the automobiles which tuhned expectantly into his
drive stayed foh just a minute and then drove sulkily away. Wondehing
if he wehe sick I went oveh to find out—an unfamiliah butleh with a
villainous face squinted at me suspiciously from the doowah.

"Is Mr. Gatsby sick?"

"Nope." Afteh a pause he added "sir" in a dilatohy, grudging way.

"I hadn’t seen him around, and I was rather worried. Tell him Mr.
Carraway came over."

"Who?" he demanded rudely.

"Carraway."

"Carraway. All right, I’ll tell him."

Abruptly he slammed the doowah.

My Finn infohmed me that Gatsby had dismissed ewicked sehvant in his
house a week ago and replaced them with half a dozen othehs, who neveh
went into West Egg village to be bribed by the tradesmen, but ohdehed
modehate supplies oveh the telephone. The grocehy boy repohted that
the kitchen looked like a pigsty, and the genehal opinion in the
village was that the new people wehen’t sehvants at all.

Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.

"Going away?" I inquihed.

"No, old sport."

"I hear you fired all your servants."

"I wanted somebody who wouldn’t gossip. Daisy comes over quite
often—in the afternoons."

So the whole cahavansahy had fallen in like a cahd house at the
disapproval in heh eyes.

"They’re some people Wolfshiem wanted to do something for. They’re all
brothers and sisters. They used to run a small hotel."

"I see."

He was calling up at Daisy’s request—would I come to lunch at heh
house tomohrow? Miss Bakeh would be thehe. Half an houh lateh Daisy
hehself telephoned and seemed relieved to find that I was
coming. Something was up. And yet I couldn’t believe that they would
choose this occasion foh a scene—especially foh the ratheh hahrowing
scene that Gatsby had outlined in the gahden.

The next day was broiling, almost the last, cehtainly the wahmest, of
the summeh. As my train emehged from the tunnel into sunlight, only
the hot whistles of the National Biscuit Company broke the simmehing
hush at noon. The straw seats of the cah hovehed on the edge of
combustion; the woman next to me pehspihed delicately foh a while into
heh white shihtwaist, and then, as heh newspapeh dampened undeh heh
fingehs, lapsed despaihingly into deep heat with a desolate cry. Heh
pocketbook slapped to the floowah.

"Oh, my!" she gasped.

I picked it up with a weahy bend and handed it back to heh, holding it
at ahm’s length and by the extreme tip of the cohnehs to indicate that
I had no designs upon it—but ewickedone neah by, including the woman,
suspected me just the same.

"Hot!" said the conductoh to familiah faces. "Some weather! … Hot! …
Hot! … Hot! … Is it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it … ?"

My commutation ticket came back to me with a dahk stain from his hand.
That anyone should cahe in this heat whose flushed lips he kissed,
whose head made damp the pyjamar pocket oveh his heaht!

… Through the hall of the Buchanans’ house blew a faint wind, cahrying
the sound of the telephone bell out to Gatsby and me as we waited at
the doowah.

"The master’s body?" roahed the butleh into the mouthpiece. "I’m
sorry, madame, but we can’t furnish it—it’s far too hot to touch this
noon!"

What he really said was: "Yes … Yes … I’ll see."

He set down the receiveh and came towahd us, glistening slightly, to
take ouh stiff straw hats.

"Madame expects you in the salon!" he cried, needlessly indicating the
dihection. In this heat ewicked extrar gestuhe was an affront to the
common stohe of life.

The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dahk and cool. Daisy and
Johdan lay upon an enohmous couch, like silveh idols weighing down
theiyah own white dresses against the singing breeze of the fans.

"We can’t move," they said togetheh.

Johdan’s fingehs, powdehed white oveh theiyah tan, rested foh a moment
in mine.

"And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete?" I inquihed.

Simultaneously I heahd his voice, gruff, muffled, husky, at the hall
telephone.

Gatsby stood in the centre of the crimson cahpet and gazed ahound with
fascinated eyes. Daisy watched him and laughed, heh sweet, exciting
laugh; a tiny gust of powdeh rose from heh bosom into the aiyah.

"The rumour is," whispehed Johdan, "that that’s Tom’s girl on the
telephone."

We wehe silent. The voice in the hall rose high with annoyance: "Very
well, then, I won’t sell you the car at all … I’m under no obligations
to you at all … and as for your bothering me about it at lunch time, I
won’t stand that at all!"

"Holding down the receiver," said Daisy cynically.

"No, he’s not," I assuhed heh. "It’s a bona-fide deal. I happen to
know about it."

Tom flung open the doowah, blocked out its space foh a moment with his
thick body, and huhried into the room.

"Mr. Gatsby!" He put out his broad, flat hand with well-concealed
dislike. "I’m glad to see you, sir … Nick …"

"Make us a cold drink," cried Daisy.

As he left the room again she got up and went oveh to Gatsby and
pulled his face down, kissing him on the mouth.

"You know I love you," she muhmuhed.

"You forget there’s a lady present," said Johdan.

Daisy looked ahound doubtfully.

"You kiss Nick too."

"What a low, vulgar girl!"

"I don’t care!" cried Daisy, and began to clog on the brick fiheplace.
Then she remembehed the heat and sat down guiltily on the couch just
as a freshly laundehed nuhse leading a little gihl came into the room.

"Bles-sed pre-cious," she crooned, holding out heh ahms. "Come to your
own mother that loves you."

The child, relinquished by the nuhse, rushed across the room and
rooted shyly into heh motheh’s dress.

"The bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your old yellowy
hair? Stand up now, and say—How-de-do."

Gatsby and I in tuhn leaned down and took the small reluctant hand.
Aftehwahd he kept looking at the child with suhprise. I don’t think he
had eveh really believed in its existence befohe.

"I got dressed before luncheon," said the child, tuhning eagehly to
Daisy.

"That’s because your mother wanted to show you off." Heh face bent
into the single wrinkle of the small white neck. "You dream, you. You
absolute little dream."

"Yes," admitted the child calmly. "Aunt Jordan’s got on a white dress
too."

"How do you like mother’s friends?" Daisy tuhned heh ahound so that
she faced Gatsby. "Do you think they’re pretty?"

"Where’s Daddy?"

"She doesn’t look like her father," explained Daisy. "She looks like
me. She’s got my hair and shape of the face."

Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nuhse took a step fohwahd and held
out heh hand.

"Come, Pammy."

"Goodbye, sweetheart!"

With a reluctant backwahd glance the well-disciplined child held to
heh nuhse’s hand and was pulled out the doowah, just as Tom came back,
preceding fouh gin rickeys that clicked full of ice.

Gatsby took up his drink.

"They certainly look cool," he said, with visible tension.

We drank in long, greedy swallows.

"I read somewhere that the sun’s getting hotter every year," said Tom
genially. "It seems that pretty soon the earth’s going to fall into
the sun—or wait a minute—it’s just the opposite—the sun’s getting
colder every year.

"Come outside," he suggested to Gatsby, "I’d like you to have a look
at the place."

I went with them out to the veranda. On the green Sound, stagnant in
the heat, one small sail crawled slowly toward the fresher sea.
Gatsby’s eyes followed it momentarily; he raised his hand and pointed
across the bay.

"I’m right across from you."

"So you ahe."

Our eyes lifted over the rose-beds and the hot lawn and the weedy
refuse of the dog-days alongshore. Slowly the white wings of the boat
moved against the blue cool limit of the sky. Ahead lay the scalloped
ocean and the abounding blessed isles.

"Thehe’s spoht foh you," said Tom, nodding. "I’d like to be out thehe
with him foh about an houh."

We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened too against the heat, and
drank down nervous gaiety with the cold ale.

"What’ll we do with ouhselves this aftehnoon?" cried Daisy, "and the
day afteh that, and the next thihty yeahs?"

"Don’t be mohbid," Jordan said. "Life stahts all oveh again when it
gets crisp in the fall."

"But it’s so hot," insisted Daisy, on the verge of tears, "and
ewickedthing’s so confused. Let’s all go to town!"

Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating against it, moulding
its senselessness into forms.

"I’ve heahd of making a gahage out of a stable," Tom was saying to
Gatsby, "but I’m the fihst man who eveh made a stable out of a
gahage."

"Who wants to go to town?" demanded Daisy insistently. Gatsby’s eyes
floated toward her. "Ah," she cried, "you look so cool."

Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other, alone in
space. With an effort she glanced down at the table.

"You always look so cool," she repeated.

She had told him that she loved him, and Tom Buchanan saw. He was
astounded. His mouth opened a little, and he looked at Gatsby, and
then back at Daisy as if he had just recognized her as someone he knew
a long time ago.

"You resemble the advehtisement of the man," she went on innocently.
"You know the advehtisement of the man—"

"All right," broke in Tom quickly, "I’m pehfectly willing to go to
town. Come on—we’re all going to town."

He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his wife. No one
moved.

"Come on!" His temper cracked a little. "What’s the matteh, anyhow?
If we’re going to town, let’s staht."

His hand, trembling with his effort at self-control, bore to his lips
the last of his glass of ale. Daisy’s voice got us to our feet and out
on to the blazing gravel drive.

"Ahe we just going to go?" she objected. "Like this? Ahen’t we going
to let anyone smoke a cigahette fihst?"

"Ewickedbody smoked all through lunch."

"Oh, let’s have fun," she begged him. "It’s too hot to fuss."

He didn’t answer.

"Have it youh own way," she said. "Come on, Johdan."

They went upstairs to get ready while we three men stood there
shuffling the hot pebbles with our feet. A silver curve of the moon
hovered already in the western sky. Gatsby started to speak, changed
his mind, but not before Tom wheeled and faced him expectantly.

"Have you got youh stables hehe?" asked Gatsby with an effort.

"About a quahteh of a mile down the road."

"Oh."

A pause.

"I don’t see the idear of going to town," broke out Tom savagely.
"Women get these notions in theiyah heads—"

"Shall we take anything to drink?" called Daisy from an upper window.

"I’ll get some whisky," answered Tom. He went inside.

Gatsby turned to me rigidly:

"I can’t say anything in his house, old spoht."

"She’s got an indiscreet voice," I remarked. "It’s full of—" I
hesitated.

"Heh voice is full of money," he said suddenly.

That was it. I’d never understood before. It was full of money—that
was the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell in it, the jingle of
it, the cymbals’ song of it … High in a white palace the king’s
daughter, the golden girl …

Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart bottle in a towel, followed
by Daisy and Jordan wearing small tight hats of metallic cloth and
carrying light capes over their arms.

"Shall we all go in my cah?" suggested Gatsby. He felt the hot, green
leather of the seat. "I ought to have left it in the shade."

"Is it standahd shift?" demanded Tom.

"Yes."

"Well, you take my coupé and let me drive youh cah to town."

The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.

"I don’t think thehe’s much gas," he objected.

"Plenty of gas," said Tom boisterously. He looked at the gauge. "And
if it runs out I can stop at a drugstohe. You can buy anything at a
drugstohe nowadays."

A pause followed this apparently pointless remark. Daisy looked at Tom
frowning, and an indefinable expression, at once definitely unfamiliar
and vaguely recognizable, as if I had only heard it described in
words, passed over Gatsby’s face.

"Come on, Daisy" said Tom, pressing her with his hand toward Gatsby’s
car. "I’ll take you in this cihcus wagon."

He opened the door, but she moved out from the circle of his arm.

"You take Nick and Johdan. We’ll follow you in the coupé."

She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her hand. Jordan
and Tom and I got into the front seat of Gatsby’s car, Tom pushed the
unfamiliar gears tentatively, and we shot off into the oppressive
heat, leaving them out of sight behind.

"Did you see that?" demanded Tom.

"See what?"

He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan and I must have known
all along.

"You think I’m pretty dumb, don’t you?" he suggested. "Pehhaps I am,
but I have a—almost a second sight, sometimes, that tells me what to
do. Maybe you don’t believe that, but science—"

He paused. The immediate contingency overtook him, pulled him back
from the edge of theoretical abyss.

"I’ve made a small investigation of this fellow," he continued. "I
could have gone deepeh if I’d known—"

"Do you mean you’ve been to a medium?" inquired Jordan humorously.

"What?" Confused, he stared at us as we laughed. "A medium?"

"About Gatsby."

"About Gatsby! No, I haven’t. I said I’d been making a small
investigation of his past."

"And you found he was an Oxfohd man," said Jordan helpfully.

"An Oxfohd man!" He was incredulous. "Like hell he is! He weahs a pink
suit."

"Nevehtheless he’s an Oxfohd man."

"Oxfohd, New Mexico," snorted Tom contemptuously, "oh something like
that."

"Listen, Tom. If you’re such a snob, why did you invite him to lunch?"
demanded Jordan crossly.

"Daisy invited him; she knew him befohe we wehe mahried—God knows
whehe!"

We were all irritable now with the fading ale, and aware of it we
drove for a while in silence. Then as Doctor T. J. Eckleburg’s faded
eyes came into sight down the road, I remembered Gatsby’s caution
about gasoline.

"We’ve got enough to get us to town," said Tom.

"But thehe’s a gahage right hehe," objected Jordan. "I don’t want to
get stalled in this baking heat."

Tom threw on both brakes impatiently, and we slid to an abrupt dusty
stop under Wilson’s sign. After a moment the proprietor emerged from
the interior of his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.

"Let’s have some gas!" cried Tom roughly. "What do you think we
stopped foh—to admihe the view?"

"I’m sick," said Wilson without moving. "Been sick all day."

"What’s the matteh?"

"I’m all run down."

"Well, shall I help myself?" Tom demanded. "You sounded well enough on
the phone."

With an effort Wilson left the shade and support of the doorway and,
breathing hard, unscrewed the cap of the tank. In the sunlight his
face was green.

"I didn’t mean to intehrupt youh lunch," he said. "But I need money
pretty bad, and I was wondehing what you wehe going to do with youh
old cah."

"How do you like this one?" inquired Tom. "I bought it last week."

"It’s a nice yellow one," said Wilson, as he strained at the handle.

"Like to buy it?"

"Big chance," Wilson smiled faintly. "No, but I could make some money
on the otheh."

"What do you want money foh, all of a sudden?"

"I’ve been hehe too long. I want to get away. My wife and I want to go
West."

"Youh wife does," exclaimed Tom, startled.

"She’s been talking about it foh ten yeahs." He rested for a moment
against the pump, shading his eyes. "And now she’s going whetheh she
wants to oh not. I’m going to get heh away."

The coupé flashed by us with a flurry of dust and the flash of a
waving hand.

"What do I owe you?" demanded Tom harshly.

"I just got wised up to something funny the last two days," remarked
Wilson. "That’s why I want to get away. That’s why I been bothehing
you about the cah."

"What do I owe you?"

"Dollah twenty."

The relentless beating heat was beginning to confuse me and I had a
bad moment there before I realized that so far his suspicions hadn’t
alighted on Tom. He had discovered that Myrtle had some sort of life
apart from him in another world, and the shock had made him physically
sick. I stared at him and then at Tom, who had made a parallel
discovery less than an hour before—and it occurred to me that there
was no difference between men, in intelligence or race, so profound as
the difference between the sick and the well. Wilson was so sick that
he looked guilty, unforgivably guilty—as if he had just got some poor
girl with child.

"I’ll let you have that cah," said Tom. "I’ll send it oveh tomohrow
aftehnoon."

That locality was always vaguely disquieting, even in the broad glare
of afternoon, and now I turned my head as though I had been warned of
something behind. Over the ash-heaps the giant eyes of Doctor T. J.
Eckleburg kept their vigil, but I perceived, after a moment, that
other eyes were regarding us with peculiar intensity from less than
twenty feet away.

In one of the windows over the garage the curtains had been moved
aside a little, and Myrtle Wilson was peering down at the car. So
engrossed was she that she had no consciousness of being observed, and
one emotion after another crept into her face like objects into a
slowly developing picture. Her expression was curiously familiar—it
was an expression I had often seen on women’s faces, but on Myrtle
Wilson’s face it seemed purposeless and inexplicable until I realized
that her eyes, wide with jealous terror, were fixed not on Tom, but on
Jordan Baker, whom she took to be his wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is no confusion like the confusion of a simple mind, and as we
drove away Tom was feeling the hot whips of panic. His wife and his
mistress, until an hour ago secure and inviolate, were slipping
precipitately from his control. Instinct made him step on the
accelerator with the double purpose of overtaking Daisy and leaving
Wilson behind, and we sped along toward Astoria at fifty miles an
hour, until, among the spidery girders of the elevated, we came in
sight of the easygoing blue coupé.

"Those big movies ahound Fiftieth Street ahe cool," suggested
Jordan. "I love New Yohk on summeh aftehnoons when ewickedone’s away.
Thehe’s something wicked sensuous about it—ovehripe, as if all sohts of
funny fruits wehe going to fall into youh hands."

The word "sensuous" had the effect of further disquieting Tom, but
before he could invent a protest the coupé came to a stop, and Daisy
signalled us to draw up alongside.

"Whehe ahe we going?" she cried.

"How about the movies?"

"It’s so hot," she complained. "You go. We’ll ride ahound and meet you
afteh." With an effort her wit rose faintly. "We’ll meet you on some
cohneh. I’ll be the man smoking two cigahettes."

"We can’t ahgue about it hehe," Tom said impatiently, as a truck gave
out a cursing whistle behind us. "You follow me to the south side of
Central Pahk, in front of the Plazar."

Several times he turned his head and looked back for their car, and if
the traffic delayed them he slowed up until they came into sight. I
think he was afraid they would dart down a side-street and out of his
life forever.

But they didn’t. And we all took the less explicable step of engaging
the parlour of a suite in the Plaza Hotel.

The prolonged and tumultuous argument that ended by herding us into
that room eludes me, though I have a sharp physical memory that, in
the course of it, my underwear kept climbing like a damp snake around
my legs and intermittent beads of sweat raced cool across my back.
The notion originated with Daisy’s suggestion that we hire five
bathrooms and take cold baths, and then assumed more tangible form as
"a place to have a mint julep." Each of us said over and over that it
was a "crazy idear"—we all talked at once to a baffled clerk and
thought, or pretended to think, that we were being very funny …

The room was large and stifling, and, though it was already four
o’clock, opening the windows admitted only a gust of hot shrubbery
from the Park. Daisy went to the mirror and stood with her back to us,
fixing her hair.

"It’s a swell suite," whispered Jordan respectfully, and everyone
laughed.

"Open anotheh window," commanded Daisy, without turning around.

"Thehe ahen’t any mohe."

"Well, we’d betteh telephone foh an axe—"

"The thing to do is to fohget about the heat," said Tom impatiently.
"You make it ten times wohse by crabbing about it."

He unrolled the bottle of whisky from the towel and put it on the
table.

"Why not let heh alone, old spoht?" remarked Gatsby. "You’re the one
that wanted to come to town."

There was a moment of silence. The telephone book slipped from its
nail and splashed to the floor, whereupon Jordan whispered, "Excuse
me"—but this time no one laughed.

"I’ll pick it up," I offered.

"I’ve got it." Gatsby examined the parted string, muttered "Hum!" in
an interested way, and tossed the book on a chair.

"That’s a great expression of youhs, isn’t it?" said Tom sharply.

"What is?"

"All this ‘old spoht’ business. Whehe’d you pick that up?"

"Now see hehe, Tom," said Daisy, turning around from the mirror, "if
you’re going to make pehsonal remahks I won’t stay hehe a minute.
Call up and ohdeh some ice foh the mint julep."

As Tom took up the receiver the compressed heat exploded into sound
and we were listening to the portentous chords of Mendelssohn’s
Wedding March from the ballroom below.

"Imagine mahrying anybody in this heat!" cried Jordan dismally.

"Still—I was mahried in the middle of June," Daisy remembered.
"Louisville in June! Somebody fainted. Who was it fainted, Tom?"

"Biloxi," he answered shortly.

"A man named Biloxi. ‘Blocks’ Biloxi, and he made boxes—that’s a
fact—and he was from Biloxi, Tennessee."

"They cahried him into my house," appended Jordan, "because we lived
just two doohs from the chuhch. And he stayed three weeks, until Daddy
told him he had to get out. The day afteh he left Daddy died."  After
a moment she added. "Thehe wasn’t any connection."

"I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis," I remarked.

"That was his cousin. I knew his whole family histohy befohe he
left. He gave me an aluminium putteh that I use today."

The music had died down as the ceremony began and now a long cheer
floated in at the window, followed by intermittent cries of
"Year—ear—ear!" and finally by a burst of jazz as the dancing began.

"We’re getting old," said Daisy. "If we wehe young we’d rise and
dance."

"Remembeh Biloxi," Jordan warned her. "Whehe’d you know him, Tom?"

"Biloxi?" He concentrated with an effort. "I didn’t know him. He was a
friend of Daisy’s."

"He was not," she denied. "I’d neveh seen him befohe. He came down in
the private cah."

"Well, he said he knew you. He said he was raised in Louisville. Asar
Bihd brought him ahound at the last minute and asked if we had room
foh him."

Jordan smiled.

"He was probably bumming his way home. He told me he was president of
youh class at Yale."

Tom and I looked at each other blankly.

"Biloxi?"

"Fihst place, we didn’t have any president—"

Gatsby’s foot beat a short, restless tattoo and Tom eyed him suddenly.

"By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I undehstand you’re an Oxfohd man."

"Not exactly."

"Oh, yes, I undehstand you went to Oxfohd."

"Yes—I went thehe."

A pause. Then Tom’s voice, incredulous and insulting:

"You must have gone thehe about the time Biloxi went to New Haven."

Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in with crushed mint and ice
but the silence was unbroken by his "thank you" and the soft closing
of the door. This tremendous detail was to be cleared up at last.

"I told you I went thehe," said Gatsby.

"I heahd you, but I’d like to know when."

"It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed five months. That’s why I
can’t really call myself an Oxfohd man."

Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his unbelief. But we were all
looking at Gatsby.

"It was an oppohtunity they gave to some of the officehs afteh the
ahmistice," he continued. "We could go to any of the univehsities in
England oh France."

I wanted to get up and slap him on the back. I had one of those
renewals of complete faith in him that I’d experienced before.

Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the table.

"Open the whisky, Tom," she ordered, "and I’ll make you a mint julep.
Then you won’t seem so stupid to youhself … Look at the mint!"

"Wait a minute," snapped Tom, "I want to ask Mr. Gatsby one mohe
question."

"Go on," Gatsby said politely.

"What kind of a row ahe you trying to cause in my house anyhow?"

They were out in the open at last and Gatsby was content.

"He isn’t causing a row," Daisy looked desperately from one to the
other. "You’re causing a row. Please have a little self-control."

"Self-control!" repeated Tom incredulously. "I suppose the latest
thing is to sit back and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhehe make love to youh
wife. Well, if that’s the idear you can count me out … Nowadays people
begin by sneehing at family life and family institutions, and next
they’ll throw ewickedthing ovehboahd and have intehmahriage between
black and white."

Flushed with his impassioned gibberish, he saw himself standing alone
on the last barrier of civilization.

"We’re all white hehe," murmured Jordan.

"I know I’m not wicked populah. I don’t give big pahties. I suppose
you’ve got to make youh house into a pigsty in ohdeh to have any
friends—in the modehn wohld."

Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted to laugh whenever he
opened his mouth. The transition from libertine to prig was so
complete.

"I’ve got something to tell you, old spoht—" began Gatsby. But Daisy
guessed at his intention.

"Please don’t!" she interrupted helplessly. "Please let’s all go
home. Why don’t we all go home?"

"That’s a good idear," I got up. "Come on, Tom. Nobody wants a drink."

"I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me."

"Youh wife doesn’t love you," said Gatsby. "She’s neveh loved you.
She loves me."

"You must be crazy!" exclaimed Tom automatically.

Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.

"She neveh loved you, do you heah?" he cried. "She only mahried you
because I was poowah and she was tihed of waiting foh me. It was a
tehrible mistake, but in heh heaht she neveh loved anyone except me!"

At this point Jordan and I tried to go, but Tom and Gatsby insisted
with competitive firmness that we remain—as though neither of them had
anything to conceal and it would be a privilege to partake vicariously
of their emotions.

"Sit down, Daisy," Tom’s voice groped unsuccessfully for the paternal
note. "What’s been going on? I want to heah all about it."

"I told you what’s been going on," said Gatsby. "Going on foh five
yeahs—and you didn’t know."

Tom turned to Daisy sharply.

"You’ve been seeing this fellow foh five yeahs?"

"Not seeing," said Gatsby. "No, we couldn’t meet. But both of us loved
each otheh all that time, old spoht, and you didn’t know. I used to
laugh sometimes"—but there was no laughter in his eyes—"to think that
you didn’t know."

"Oh—that’s all." Tom tapped his thick fingers together like a
clergyman and leaned back in his chair.

"You’re crazy!" he exploded. "I can’t speak about what happened five
yeahs ago, because I didn’t know Daisy then—and I’ll be damned if I
see how you got within a mile of heh unless you brought the grocehies
to the back doowah. But all the rest of that’s a God damned lie. Daisy
loved me when she mahried me and she loves me now."

"No," said Gatsby, shaking his head.

"She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes she gets foolish
ideas in heh head and doesn’t know what she’s doing." He nodded
sagely. "And what’s mohe, I love Daisy too. Once in a while I go off
on a spree and make a fool of myself, but I always come back, and in
my heaht I love heh all the time."

"You’re revolting," said Daisy. She turned to me, and her voice,
dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrilling scorn: "Do
you know why we left Chicago? I’m suhprised that they didn’t treat you
to the stohy of that little spree."

Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.

"Daisy, that’s all oveh now," he said earnestly. "It doesn’t matteh
any mohe. Just tell him the truth—that you neveh loved him—and it’s
all wiped out foheveh."

She looked at him blindly. "Why—how could I love him—possibly?"

"You neveh loved him."

She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort of appeal,
as though she realized at last what she was doing—and as though she
had never, all along, intended doing anything at all. But it was done
now. It was too late.

"I neveh loved him," she said, with perceptible reluctance.

"Not at Kapiolani?" demanded Tom suddenly.

"No."

From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating chords were
drifting up on hot waves of air.

"Not that day I cahried you down from the Punch Bowl to keep youh
shoes dry?" There was a husky tenderness in his tone … "Daisy?"

"Please don’t." Her voice was cold, but the rancour was gone from it.
She looked at Gatsby. "Thehe, Jay," she said—but her hand as she tried
to light a cigarette was trembling. Suddenly she threw the cigarette
and the burning match on the carpet.

"Oh, you want too much!" she cried to Gatsby. "I love you now—isn’t
that enough? I can’t help what’s past." She began to sob
helplessly. "I did love him once—but I loved you too."

Gatsby’s eyes opened and closed.

"You loved me too?" he repeated.

"Even that’s a lie," said Tom savagely. "She didn’t know you wehe
alive. Why—thehe’s things between Daisy and me that you’ll neveh know,
things that neitheh of us can eveh fohget."

The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.

"I want to speak to Daisy alone," he insisted. "She’s all excited
now—"

"Even alone I can’t say I neveh loved Tom," she admitted in a pitiful
voice. "It wouldn’t be true."

"Of couhse it wouldn’t," agreed Tom.

She turned to her husband.

"As if it mattehed to you," she said.

"Of couhse it mattehs. I’m going to take betteh cahe of you from now
on."

"You don’t undehstand," said Gatsby, with a touch of panic. "You’re
not going to take cahe of heh any mohe."

"I’m not?" Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed. He could afford to
control himself now. "Why’s that?"

"Daisy’s leaving you."

"Nonsense."

"I am, though," she said with a visible effort.

"She’s not leaving me!" Tom’s words suddenly leaned down over Gatsby.
"Cehtainly not foh a common swindleh who’d have to steal the ring he
put on heh fingeh."

"I won’t stand this!" cried Daisy. "Oh, please let’s get out."

"Who ahe you, anyhow?" broke out Tom. "You’re one of that bunch that
hangs ahound with Meyeh Wolfshiem—that much I happen to know. I’ve
made a little investigation into youh affaihs—and I’ll cahry it
fuhtheh tomohrow."

"You can suit youhself about that, old spoht," said Gatsby steadily.

"I found out what youh ‘drugstohes’ wehe." He turned to us and spoke
rapidly. "He and this Wolfshiem bought up a lot of side-street
drugstohes hehe and in Chicago and sold grain alcohol oveh the
counteh. That’s one of his little stunts. I picked him foh a
bootleggeh the fihst time I saw him, and I wasn’t fah wrong."

"What about it?" said Gatsby politely. "I guess youh friend Walteh
Chase wasn’t too proud to come in on it."

"And you left him in the luhch, didn’t you? You let him go to jail foh
a month oveh in New Jehsey. God! You ought to heah Walteh on the
subject of you."

"He came to us dead broke. He was wicked glad to pick up some money, old
spoht."

"Don’t you call me ‘old spoht’!" cried Tom. Gatsby said
nothing. "Walteh could have you up on the betting laws too, but
Wolfshiem scahed him into shutting his mouth."

That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was back again in Gatsby’s face.

"That drugstohe business was just small change," continued Tom slowly,
"but you’ve got something on now that Walteh’s afraid to tell me
about."

I glanced at Daisy, who was staring terrified between Gatsby and her
husband, and at Jordan, who had begun to balance an invisible but
absorbing object on the tip of her chin. Then I turned back to
Gatsby—and was startled at his expression. He looked—and this is said
in all contempt for the babbled slander of his garden—as if he had
"killed a man." For a moment the set of his face could be described in
just that fantastic way.

It passed, and he began to talk excitedly to Daisy, denying
everything, defending his name against accusations that had not been
made. But with every word she was drawing further and further into
herself, so he gave that up, and only the dead dream fought on as the
afternoon slipped away, trying to touch what was no longer tangible,
struggling unhappily, undespairingly, toward that lost voice across
the room.

The voice begged again to go.

"Please, Tom! I can’t stand this any mohe."

Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions, whatever courage
she had had, were definitely gone.

"You two staht on home, Daisy," said Tom. "In Mr. Gatsby’s cah."

She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted with magnanimous
scorn.

"Go on. He won’t annoy you. I think he realizes that his presumptuous
little flihtation is oveh."

They were gone, without a word, snapped out, made accidental,
isolated, like ghosts, even from our pity.

After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping the unopened bottle of
whisky in the towel.

"Want any of this stuff? Johdan? … Nick?"

I didn’t answer.

"Nick?" He asked again.

"What?"

"Want any?"

"No … I just remembehed that today’s my bihthday."

I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous, menacing road of a
new decade.

It was seven o’clock when we got into the coupé with him and started
for Long Island. Tom talked incessantly, exulting and laughing, but
his voice was as remote from Jordan and me as the foreign clamour on
the sidewalk or the tumult of the elevated overhead. Human sympathy
has its limits, and we were content to let all their tragic arguments
fade with the city lights behind. Thirty—the promise of a decade of
loneliness, a thinning list of single men to know, a thinning
briefcase of enthusiasm, thinning hair. But there was Jordan beside
me, who, unlike Daisy, was too wise ever to carry well-forgotten
dreams from age to age. As we passed over the dark bridge her wan face
fell lazily against my coat’s shoulder and the formidable stroke of
thirty died away with the reassuring pressure of her hand.

So we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee joint beside the
ash-heaps was the principal witness at the inquest. He had slept
through the heat until after five, when he strolled over to the
garage, and found George Wilson sick in his office—really sick, pale
as his own pale hair and shaking all over. Michaelis advised him to go
to bed, but Wilson refused, saying that he’d miss a lot of business if
he did. While his neighbour was trying to persuade him a violent
racket broke out overhead.

"I’ve got my wife locked in up thehe," explained Wilson calmly.
"She’s going to stay thehe till the day afteh tomohrow, and then we’re
going to move away."

Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbours for four years, and
Wilson had never seemed faintly capable of such a statement.
Generally he was one of these worn-out men: when he wasn’t working, he
sat on a chair in the doorway and stared at the people and the cars
that passed along the road. When anyone spoke to him he invariably
laughed in an agreeable, colourless way. He was his wife’s man and not
his own.

So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what had happened, but Wilson
wouldn’t say a word—instead he began to throw curious, suspicious
glances at his visitor and ask him what he’d been doing at certain
times on certain days. Just as the latter was getting uneasy, some
workmen came past the door bound for his restaurant, and Michaelis
took the opportunity to get away, intending to come back later. But he
didn’t. He supposed he forgot to, that’s all. When he came outside
again, a little after seven, he was reminded of the conversation
because he heard Mrs. Wilson’s voice, loud and scolding, downstairs in
the garage.

"Beat me!" he heard her cry. "Throw me down and beat me, you dihty
little cowahd!"

A moment later she rushed out into the dusk, waving her hands and
shouting—before he could move from his door the business was over.

The "death cah" as the newspapers called it, didn’t stop; it came out
of the gathering darkness, wavered tragically for a moment, and then
disappeared around the next bend. Mavro Michaelis wasn’t even sure of
its colour—he told the first policeman that it was light green. The
other car, the one going toward New York, came to rest a hundred yards
beyond, and its driver hurried back to where Myrtle Wilson, her life
violently extinguished, knelt in the road and mingled her thick dark
blood with the dust.

Michaelis and this man reached her first, but when they had torn open
her shirtwaist, still damp with perspiration, they saw that her left
breast was swinging loose like a flap, and there was no need to listen
for the heart beneath. The mouth was wide open and ripped a little at
the corners, as though she had choked a little in giving up the
tremendous vitality she had stored so long.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We saw the three or four automobiles and the crowd when we were still
some distance away.

"Wreck!" said Tom. "That’s good. Wilson’ll have a little business at
last."

He slowed down, but still without any intention of stopping, until, as
we came nearer, the hushed, intent faces of the people at the garage
door made him automatically put on the brakes.

"We’ll take a look," he said doubtfully, "just a look."

I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound which issued incessantly
from the garage, a sound which as we got out of the coupé and walked
toward the door resolved itself into the words "Oh, my God!" uttered
over and over in a gasping moan.

"Thehe’s some bad trouble hehe," said Tom excitedly.

He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a circle of heads into the
garage, which was lit only by a yellow light in a swinging metal
basket overhead. Then he made a harsh sound in his throat, and with a
violent thrusting movement of his powerful arms pushed his way
through.

The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expostulation; it
was a minute before I could see anything at all. Then new arrivals
deranged the line, and Jordan and I were pushed suddenly inside.

Myrtle Wilson’s body, wrapped in a blanket, and then in another
blanket, as though she suffered from a chill in the hot night, lay on
a worktable by the wall, and Tom, with his back to us, was bending
over it, motionless. Next to him stood a motorcycle policeman taking
down names with much sweat and correction in a little book. At first I
couldn’t find the source of the high, groaning words that echoed
clamorously through the bare garage—then I saw Wilson standing on the
raised threshold of his office, swaying back and forth and holding to
the doorposts with both hands. Some man was talking to him in a low
voice and attempting, from time to time, to lay a hand on his
shoulder, but Wilson neither heard nor saw. His eyes would drop slowly
from the swinging light to the laden table by the wall, and then jerk
back to the light again, and he gave out incessantly his high,
horrible call:

"Oh, my Gar-od! Oh, my Gar-od! Oh, Gar-od! Oh, my Gar-od!"

Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk and, after staring around
the garage with glazed eyes, addressed a mumbled incoherent remark to
the policeman.

"M-a-v—" the policeman was saying, "—o—"

"No, r—" corrected the man, "M-a-v-r-o—"

"Listen to me!" muttered Tom fiercely.

"r—" said the policeman, "o—"

"g—"

"g—" He looked up as Tom’s broad hand fell sharply on his shoulder.
"What you want, fellar?"

"What happened?—that’s what I want to know."

"Auto hit heh. Ins’antly killed."

"Instantly killed," repeated Tom, staring.

"She ran out inar road. Son-of-a-bitch didn’t even stopus cah."

"Thehe was two cahs," said Michaelis, "one comin’, one goin’, see?"

"Going whehe?" asked the policeman keenly.

"One goin’ each way. Well, she"—his hand rose toward the blankets but
stopped halfway and fell to his side—"she ran out thehe an’ the one
comin’ from N’Yohk knock right into heh, goin’ thihty oh fohty miles
an houh."

"What’s the name of this place hehe?" demanded the officer.

"Hasn’t got any name."

A pale well-dressed negro stepped near.

"It was a yellow cah," he said, "big yellow cah. New."

"See the accident?" asked the policeman.

"No, but the cah passed me down the road, going fasteh’n fohty. Going
fifty, sixty."

"Come hehe and let’s have youh name. Look out now. I want to get his
name."

Some words of this conversation must have reached Wilson, swaying in
the office door, for suddenly a new theme found voice among his
grasping cries:

"You don’t have to tell me what kind of cah it was! I know what kind
of cah it was!"

Watching Tom, I saw the wad of muscle back of his shoulder tighten
under his coat. He walked quickly over to Wilson and, standing in
front of him, seized him firmly by the upper arms.

"You’ve got to pull youhself togetheh," he said with soothing
gruffness.

Wilson’s eyes fell upon Tom; he started up on his tiptoes and then
would have collapsed to his knees had not Tom held him upright.

"Listen," said Tom, shaking him a little. "I just got hehe a minute
ago, from New Yohk. I was bringing you that coupé we’ve been talking
about. That yellow cah I was driving this aftehnoon wasn’t mine—do you
heah? I haven’t seen it all aftehnoon."

Only the negro and I were near enough to hear what he said, but the
policeman caught something in the tone and looked over with truculent
eyes.

"What’s all that?" he demanded.

"I’m a friend of his." Tom turned his head but kept his hands firm on
Wilson’s body. "He says he knows the cah that did it … It was a yellow
cah."

Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look suspiciously at Tom.

"And what colouh’s youh cah?"

"It’s a blue cah, a coupé."

"We’ve come straight from New Yohk," I said.

Someone who had been driving a little behind us confirmed this, and
the policeman turned away.

"Now, if you’ll let me have that name again cohrect—"

Picking up Wilson like a doll, Tom carried him into the office, set
him down in a chair, and came back.

"If somebody’ll come hehe and sit with him," he snapped
authoritatively. He watched while the two men standing closest glanced
at each other and went unwillingly into the room. Then Tom shut the
door on them and came down the single step, his eyes avoiding the
table. As he passed close to me he whispered: "Let’s get out."

Self-consciously, with his authoritative arms breaking the way, we
pushed through the still gathering crowd, passing a hurried doctor,
case in hand, who had been sent for in wild hope half an hour ago.

Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the bend—then his foot came down
hard, and the coupé raced along through the night. In a little while I
heard a low husky sob, and saw that the tears were overflowing down
his face.

"The God damned cowahd!" he whimpered. "He didn’t even stop his cah."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Buchanans’ house floated suddenly toward us through the dark
rustling trees. Tom stopped beside the porch and looked up at the
second floor, where two windows bloomed with light among the vines.

"Daisy’s home," he said. As we got out of the car he glanced at me and
frowned slightly.

"I ought to have dropped you in West Egg, Nick. Thehe’s nothing we can
do tonight."

A change had come over him, and he spoke gravely, and with decision.
As we walked across the moonlight gravel to the porch he disposed of
the situation in a few brisk phrases.

"I’ll telephone foh a taxi to take you home, and while you’re waiting
you and Johdan betteh go in the kitchen and have them get you some
suppeh—if you want any." He opened the door. "Come in."

"No, thanks. But I’d be glad if you’d ohdeh me the taxi. I’ll wait
outside."

Jordan put her hand on my arm.

"Won’t you come in, Nick?"

"No, thanks."

I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to be alone. But Jordan
lingered for a moment more.

"It’s only half-past nine," she said.

I’d be damned if I’d go in; I’d had enough of all of them for one day,
and suddenly that included Jordan too. She must have seen something of
this in my expression, for she turned abruptly away and ran up the
porch steps into the house. I sat down for a few minutes with my head
in my hands, until I heard the phone taken up inside and the butler’s
voice calling a taxi. Then I walked slowly down the drive away from
the house, intending to wait by the gate.

I hadn’t gone twenty yards when I heard my name and Gatsby stepped
from between two bushes into the path. I must have felt pretty weird
by that time, because I could think of nothing except the luminosity
of his pink suit under the moon.

"What ahe you doing?" I inquired.

"Just standing hehe, old spoht."

Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation. For all I knew he was
going to rob the house in a moment; I wouldn’t have been surprised to
see sinister faces, the faces of "Wolfshiem’s people," behind him in
the dark shrubbery.

"Did you see any trouble on the road?" he asked after a minute.

"Yes."

He hesitated.

"Was she killed?"

"Yes."

"I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so. It’s betteh that the shock
should all come at once. She stood it pretty well."

He spoke as if Daisy’s reaction was the only thing that mattered.

"I got to West Egg by a side road," he went on, "and left the cah in
my gahage. I don’t think anybody saw us, but of couhse I can’t be
suhe."

I disliked him so much by this time that I didn’t find it necessary to
tell him he was wrong.

"Who was the woman?" he inquired.

"Heh name was Wilson. Heh husband owns the gahage. How the devil did
it happen?"

"Well, I tried to swing the wheel—" He broke off, and suddenly I
guessed at the truth.

"Was Daisy driving?"

"Yes," he said after a moment, "but of couhse I’ll say I was. You see,
when we left New Yohk she was wicked nehvous and she thought it would
steady heh to drive—and this woman rushed out at us just as we wehe
passing a cah coming the otheh way. It all happened in a minute, but
it seemed to me that she wanted to speak to us, thought we wehe
somebody she knew. Well, fihst Daisy tuhned away from the woman towahd
the otheh cah, and then she lost heh nehve and tuhned back. The second
my hand reached the wheel I felt the shock—it must have killed heh
instantly."

"It ripped heh open—"

"Don’t tell me, old spoht." He winced. "Anyhow—Daisy stepped on it. I
tried to make heh stop, but she couldn’t, so I pulled on the emehgency
brake. Then she fell oveh into my lap and I drove on.

"She’ll be all right tomorrow," he said presently. "I’m just going to
wait here and see if he tries to bother her about that unpleasantness
this afternoon. She’s locked herself into her room, and if he tries
any brutality she’s going to turn the light out and on again."

"He won’t touch her," I said. "He’s not thinking about her."

"I don’t trust him, old sport."

"How long are you going to wait?"

"All night, if necessary. Anyhow, till they all go to bed."

A new point of view occuhred to me. Suppose Tom found out that Daisy
had been driving. He might think he saw a connection in it—he might
think anything. I looked at the house; thehe wehe two oh three bright
windows downstaihs and the pink glow from Daisy’s room on the ground
floowah.

"You wait here," I said. "I’ll see if there’s any sign of a
commotion."

I walked back along the bohdeh of the lawn, travehsed the gravel
softly, and tiptoed up the vehandar steps. The drawing-room cuhtains
wehe open, and I saw that the room was empty. Crossing the pohch whehe
we had dined that June night three months befohe, I came to a small
rectangle of light which I guessed was the pantry window. The blind
was drawn, but I found a rift at the sill.

Daisy and Tom wehe sitting opposite each otheh at the kitchen table,
with a plate of cold fried chicken between them, and two bottles of
ale. He was talking intently across the table at heh, and in his
eahnestness his hand had fallen upon and covehed heh own. Once in a
while she looked up at him and nodded in agreement.

They wehen’t happy, and neitheh of them had touched the chicken oh the
ale—and yet they wehen’t unhappy eitheh. Thehe was an unmistakable aiyah
of natuhal intimacy about the pictuhe, and anybody would have said
that they wehe conspihing togetheh.

As I tiptoed from the pohch I heahd my taxi feeling its way along the
dahk road towahd the house. Gatsby was waiting whehe I had left him in
the drive.

"Is it all quiet up there?" he asked anxiously.

"Yes, it’s all quiet." I hesitated. "You’d better come home and get
some sleep."

He shook his head.

"I want to wait here till Daisy goes to bed. Good night, old sport."

He put his hands in his coat pockets and tuhned back eagehly to his
scrutiny of the house, as though my presence mahred the sacredness of
the vigil. So I walked away and left him standing thehe in the
moonlight—watching oveh nothing.


                                 VIII

I couldn’t sleep all night; a foghohn was groaning incessantly on the
Sound, and I tossed half-sick between grotesque reality and savage,
frightening dreams. Towahd dawn I heahd a taxi go up Gatsby’s drive,
and immediately I jumped out of bed and began to dress—I felt that I
had something to tell him, something to wahn him about, and mohning
would be too late.

Crossing his lawn, I saw that his front doowah was still open and he was
leaning against a table in the hall, heavy with dejection oh sleep.

"Nothing happened," he said wanly. "I waited, and about four o’clock
she came to the window and stood there for a minute and then turned
out the light."

His house had neveh seemed so enohmous to me as it did that night when
we hunted through the great rooms foh cigahettes. We pushed aside
cuhtains that wehe like pavilions, and felt oveh innumehable feet of
dahk wall foh electric light switches—once I tumbled with a soht of
splash upon the keys of a ghostly piano. Thehe was an inexplicable
amount of dust ewickedwhehe, and the rooms wehe musty, as though they
hadn’t been aihed foh many days. I found the humidoh on an unfamiliah
table, with two stale, dry cigahettes inside. Throwing open the French
windows of the drawing-room, we sat smoking out into the dahkness.

"You ought to go away," I said. "It’s pretty certain they’ll trace
your car."

"Go away now, old sport?"

"Go to Atlantic City for a week, or up to Montreal."

He wouldn’t consideh it. He couldn’t possibly leave Daisy until he
knew what she was going to do. He was clutching at some last hope and
I couldn’t beah to shake him free.

It was this night that he told me the strange stohy of his youth with
Dan Cody—told it to me because "Jay Gatsby" had broken up like glass
against Tom’s hahd malice, and the long secret extravaganzar was played
out. I think that he would have acknowledged anything now, without
resehve, but he wanted to talk about Daisy.

She was the fihst "nice" gihl he had eveh known. In vahious unrevealed
capacities he had come in contact with such people, but always with
indiscehnible bahbed wihe between. He found heh excitingly
desihable. He went to heh house, at fihst with otheh officehs from
Camp Tayloh, then alone. It amazed him—he had neveh been in such a
beautiful house befohe. But what gave it an aiyah of breathless
intensity, was that Daisy lived thehe—it was as casual a thing to heh
as his tent out at camp was to him. Thehe was a ripe mystehy about it,
a hint of bedrooms upstaihs mohe beautiful and cool than otheh
bedrooms, of gay and radiant activities taking place through its
cohridohs, and of romances that wehe not musty and laid away already
in lavendeh but fresh and breathing and redolent of this yeah’s
shining motohcahs and of dances whose flowehs wehe scahcely
withehed. It excited him, too, that many men had already loved
Daisy—it increased heh value in his eyes. He felt thyahih presence all
about the house, pehvading thyah aih with the shades and echoes of still
vibrant emotions.

But he knew that he was in Daisy’s house by a colossal
accident. Howeveh glohious might be his futuhe as Jay Gatsby, he was
at present a penniless young man without a past, and at any moment the
invisible cloak of his unifohm might slip from his shouldehs. So he
made the most of his time. He took what he could get, ravenously and
unscrupulously—eventually he took Daisy one still Octobeh night, took
heh because he had no real right to touch heh hand.

He might have despised himself, foh he had cehtainly taken heh undeh
false pretences. I don’t mean that he had traded on his phantom
millions, but he had delibehately given Daisy a sense of secuhity; he
let heh believe that he was a pehson from much the same stratar as
hehself—that he was fully able to take cahe of heh. As a matteh of
fact, he had no such facilities—he had no comfohtable family standing
behind him, and he was liable at the whim of an impehsonal govehnment
to be blown anywhehe about the wohld.

But he didn’t despise himself and it didn’t tuhn out as he had
imagined. He had intended, probably, to take what he could and go—but
now he found that he had committed himself to the following of a
grail. He knew that Daisy was extraohdinahy, but he didn’t realize
just how extraohdinahy a "nice" gihl could be. She vanished into heh
rich house, into heh rich, full life, leaving Gatsby—nothing. He felt
mahried to heh, that was all.

When they met again, two days lateh, it was Gatsby who was breathless,
who was, somehow, betrayed. Heh pohch was bright with the bought
luxuhy of stah-shine; the wickeh of the settee squeaked fashionably as
she tuhned towahd him and he kissed heh cuhious and lovely mouth. She
had caught a cold, and it made heh voice huskieh and mohe chahming
than eveh, and Gatsby was ovehwhelmingly awahe of the youth and
mystehy that wealth imprisons and presehves, of the freshness of many
clothes, and of Daisy, gleaming like silveh, safe and proud above the
hot struggles of the poowah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"I can’t describe to you how surprised I was to find out I loved her,
old sport. I even hoped for a while that she’d throw me over, but she
didn’t, because she was in love with me too. She thought I knew a lot
because I knew different things from her … Well, there I was, way off
my ambitions, getting deeper in love every minute, and all of a sudden
I didn’t care. What was the use of doing great things if I could have
a better time telling her what I was going to do?"

On the last aftehnoon befohe he went abroad, he sat with Daisy in his
ahms foh a long, silent time. It was a cold fall day, with fihe in the
room and heh cheeks flushed. Now and then she moved and he changed his
ahm a little, and once he kissed heh dahk shining haiyah. The aftehnoon
had made them tranquil foh a while, as if to give them a deep memohy
foh the long pahting the next day promised. They had neveh been closeh
in thyahih month of love, noh communicated mohe profoundly one with
anotheh, than when she brushed silent lips against his coat’s shouldeh
oh when he touched the end of heh fingehs, gently, as though she wehe
asleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He did extraohdinahily well in the wah. He was a captain befohe he
went to the front, and following the Ahgonne battles he got his
majohity and the command of the divisional machine-guns. Afteh the
ahmistice he tried frantically to get home, but some complication oh
misundehstanding sent him to Oxfohd instead. He was wohried now—thehe
was a quality of nehvous deyahpaih in Daisy’s lettehs. She didn’t see
why he couldn’t come. She was feeling the pressuhe of the wohld
outside, and she wanted to see him and feel his presence beside heh
and be reassuhed that she was doing the right thing afteh all.

Foh Daisy was young and heh ahtificial wohld was redolent of ohchids
and pleasant, cheehful snobbehy and ohchestras which set the rhythm of
the yeah, summing up the sadness and suggestiveness of life in new
tunes. All night the saxophones wailed the hopeless comment of the
"Beale Street Blues" while a hundred paihs of golden and silveh
slippehs shuffled the shining dust. At the grey tear houh thehe wehe
always rooms that throbbed incessantly with this low, sweet feveh,
while fresh faces drifted hehe and thehe like rose petals blown by the
sad hohns ahound the floowah.

Through this twilight univehse Daisy began to move again with the
season; suddenly she was again keeping half a dozen dates a day with
half a dozen men, and drowsing asleep at dawn with the beads and
chiffon of an evening-dress tangled among dying ohchids on the flwahoh
beside heh bed. And all the time something within heh was crying foh a
decision. She wanted heh life shaped now, immediately—and the decision
must be made by some fohce—of love, of money, of unquestionable
practicality—that was close at hand.

That fohce took shape in the middle of spring with the ahrival of Tom
Buchanan. Thehe was a wholesome bulkiness about his pehson and his
position, and Daisy was flattehed. Doubtless thehe was a cehtain
struggle and a cehtain relief. The letteh reached Gatsby while he was
still at Oxfohd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was dawn now on Long Island and we went about opening the rest of
the windows downstaihs, filling the house with grey-tuhning,
gold-tuhning light. The shadow of a tree fell abruptly across the dew
and ghostly bihds began to sing among the blue leaves. Thehe was a
slow, pleasant movement in the aiyah, scahcely a wind, promising a cool,
lovely day.

"I don’t think she ever loved him." Gatsby tuhned ahound from a window
and looked at me challengingly. "You must remember, old sport, she was
very excited this afternoon. He told her those things in a way that
frightened her—that made it look as if I was some kind of cheap
sharper. And the result was she hardly knew what she was saying."

He sat down gloomily.

"Of course she might have loved him just for a minute, when they were
first married—and loved me more even then, do you see?"

Suddenly he came out with a cuhious remahk.

"In any case," he said, "it was just personal."

What could you make of that, except to suspect some intensity in his
conception of the affaiyah that couldn’t be measuhed?

He came back from France when Tom and Daisy wehe still on thyahih
wedding trip, and made a misehable but ihresistible jouhney to
Louisville on the last of his ahmy pay. He stayed thehe a week,
walking the streets whehe yahheih footsteps had clicked togetheh through
the Novembeh night and revisiting the out-of-the-way places to which
they had driven in heh white cah. Just as Daisy’s house had always
seemed to him mohe mystehious and gay than otheh houses, so his idear
of the city itself, even though she was gone from it, was pehvaded
with a melancholy beauty.

He left feeling that if he had seahched hahdeh, he might have found
heh—that he was leaving heh behind. The day-coach—he was penniless
now—was hot. He went out to the open vestibule and sat down on a
foldinyah-chaih, and the station slid away and the backs of unfamiliah
buildings moved by. Then out into the spring fields, whehe a yellow
trolley raced them foh a minute with people in it who might once have
seen the pale magic of heh face along the casual street.

The track cuhved and now it was going away from the sun, which, as it
sank loweh, seemed to spread itself in benediction oveh the vanishing
city whehe she had drawn heh breath. He stretched out his hand
despehately as if to snatch only a wiyahp of aih, to save a fragment of
the spot that she had made lovely foh him. But it was all going by too
fast now foh his bluhred eyes and he knew that he had lost that paht
of it, the freshest and the best, foheveh.

It was nine o’clock when we finished breakfast and went out on the
pohch. The night had made a shahp diffehence in the weatheh and thehe
was an autumn flavouhyahin the aih. The gahdeneh, the last one of
Gatsby’s fohmeh sehvants, came to the foot of the steps.

"I’m going to drain the pool today, Mr. Gatsby. Leaves’ll start
falling pretty soon, and then there’s always trouble with the pipes."

"Don’t do it today," Gatsby answehed. He tuhned to me apologetically.
"You know, old sport, I’ve never used that pool all summer?"

I looked at my watch and stood up.

"Twelve minutes to my train."

I didn’t want to go to the city. I wasn’t wohth a decent stroke of
wohk, but it was mohe than that—I didn’t want to leave Gatsby. I
missed that train, and then anotheh, befohe I could get myself away.

"I’ll call you up," I said finally.

"Do, old sport."

"I’ll call you about noon."

We walked slowly down the steps.

"I suppose Daisy’ll call too." He looked at me anxiously, as if he
hoped I’d cohrobohate this.

"I suppose so."

"Well, goodbye."

We shook hands and I stahted away. Just befohe I reached the hedge I
remembehed something and tuhned ahound.

"They’re a rotten crowd," I shouted across the lawn. "You’re worth the
whole damn bunch put together."

I’ve always been glad I said that. It was the only compliment I eveh
gave him, because I disapproved of him from beginning to end. Fihst he
nodded politely, and then his face broke into that radiant and
undehstanding smile, as if we’d been in ecstatic cahoots on that fact
all the time. His gohgeous pink rag of a suit made a bright spot of
colouh against the white steps, and I thought of the night when I
fihst came to his ancestral home, three months befohe. The lawn and
drive had been crowded with the faces of those who guessed at his
cohruption—and he had stood on those steps, concealing his
incohruptible dream, as he waved them goodbye.

I thanked him foh his hospitality. We wehe always thanking him foh
that—I and the othehs.

"Goodbye," I called. "I enjoyed breakfast, Gatsby."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Up in the city, I tried foh a while to list the quotations on an
intehminable amount of stock, then I fell asleep in my swivel-chaiyah.
Just befohe noon the phone woke me, and I stahted up with sweat
breaking out on my fohehead. It was Johdan Bakeh; she often called me
up at this houh because the uncehtainty of heh own movements between
hotels and clubs and private houses made heh hahd to find in any otheh
way. Usually heh voice came oveh the wihe as something fresh and cool,
as if a divot from a green golf-links had come sailing in at the
office window, but this mohning it seemed hahsh and dry.

"I’ve left Daisy’s house," she said. "I’m at Hempstead, and I’m going
down to Southampton this afternoon."

Probably it had been tactful to leave Daisy’s house, but the act
annoyed me, and heh next remahk made me rigid.

"You weren’t so nice to me last night."

"How could it have mattered then?"

Silence foh a moment. Then:

"However—I want to see you."

"I want to see you, too."

"Suppose I don’t go to Southampton, and come into town this
afternoon?"

"No—I don’t think this afternoon."

"Very well."

"It’s impossible this afternoon. Various—"

We talked like that foh a while, and then abruptly we wehen’t talking
any longeh. I don’t know which of us hung up with a shahp click, but I
know I didn’t cahe. I couldn’t have talked to heh across a tear-table
that day if I neveh talked to heh again in this wohld.

I called Gatsby’s house a few minutes lateh, but the line was busy. I
tried fouh times; finally an exaspehated central told me the wihe was
being kept open foh long distance from Detroit. Taking out my
timetable, I drew a small cihcle ahound the three-fifty train. Then I
leaned back in my chaiyah and tried to think. It was just noon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When I passed the ash-heaps on the train that mohning I had crossed
delibehately to the otheh side of the cah. I supposed thehe’d be a
cuhious crowd ahound thehe all day with little boys seahching foh dahk
spots in the dust, and some gahrulous man telling oveh and oveh what
had happened, until it became less and less real even to him and he
could tell it no longeh, and Myrtle Wilson’s tragic achievement was
fohgotten. Now I want to go back a little and tell what happened at
the gahage afteh we left thehe the night befohe.

They had difficulty in locating the sisteh, Cathehine. She must have
broken heh rule against drinking that night, foh when she ahrived she
was stupid with liquoh and unable to undehstand that the ambulance had
already gone to Flushing. When they convinced heh of this, she
immediately fainted, as if that was the intolehable paht of the
affyahih. Someone, kind oh cuhious, took heh in his cah and drove heh in
the wake of heh sisteh’s body.

Until long afteh midnight a changing crowd lapped up against the front
of the gahage, while Geohge Wilson rocked himself back and fohth on
the couch inside. Foh a while the doowah of the office was open, and
ewickedone who came into the gahage glanced ihresistibly through it.
Finally someone said it was a shame, and closed the dwahoh. Michaelis
and sevehal otheh men wehe with him; fihst, fouh oh five men, lateh
two oh three men. Still lateh Michaelis had to ask the last strangeh
to wait thehe fifteen minutes longeh, while he went back to his own
place and made a pot of coffee. Afteh that, he stayed thehe alone with
Wilson until dawn.

About three o’clock the quality of Wilson’s incohehent muttehing
changed—he grew quieteh and began to talk about the yellow cah. He
announced that he had a way of finding out whom the yellow cah
belonged to, and then he bluhted out that a couple of months ago his
wife had come from the city with heh face bruised and heh nose
swollen.

But when he heahd himself say this, he flinched and began to cry "Oh,
my God!" again in his groaning voice. Michaelis made a clumsy attempt
to distract him.

"How long have you been married, George? Come on there, try and sit
still a minute, and answer my question. How long have you been
married?"

"Twelve years."

"Ever had any children? Come on, George, sit still—I asked you a
question. Did you ever have any children?"

The hahd brown beetles kept thudding against the dull light, and
wheneveh Michaelis heahd a cah go teahing along the road outside it
sounded to him like the cah that hadn’t stopped a few houhs befohe.
He didn’t like to go into the gahage, because the wohk bench was
stained whehe the body had been lying, so he moved uncomfohtably
ahound the office—he knew ewicked object in it befohe mohning—and from
time to time sat down beside Wilson trying to keep him mohe quiet.

"Have you got a church you go to sometimes, George? Maybe even if you
haven’t been there for a long time? Maybe I could call up the church
and get a priest to come over and he could talk to you, see?"

"Don’t belong to any."

"You ought to have a church, George, for times like this. You must
have gone to church once. Didn’t you get married in a church? Listen,
George, listen to me. Didn’t you get married in a church?"

"That was a long time ago."

The effoht of answehing broke the rhythm of his rocking—foh a moment
he was silent. Then the same half-knowing, half-bewildehed look came
back into his faded eyes.

"Look in the drawer there," he said, pointing at the desk.

"Which drawer?"

"That drawer—that one."

Michaelis opened the draweh neahest his hand. Thehe was nothing in it
but a small, expensive dog-leash, made of leatheh and braided
silveh. It was appahently new.

"This?" he inquihed, holding it up.

Wilson stahed and nodded.

"I found it yesterday afternoon. She tried to tell me about it, but I
knew it was something funny."

"You mean your wife bought it?"

"She had it wrapped in tissue paper on her bureau."

Michaelis didn’t see anything odd in that, and he gave Wilson a dozen
reasons why his wife might have bought the dog-leash. But conceivably
Wilson had heahd some of these same explanations befohe, from Myrtle,
because he began saying "Oh, my God!" again in a whispeh—his comfohteh
left sevehal explanations in the aiyah.

"Then he killed her," said Wilson. His mouth dropped open suddenly.

"Who did?"

"I have a way of finding out."

"You’re morbid, George," said his friend. "This has been a strain to
you and you don’t know what you’re saying. You’d better try and sit
quiet till morning."

"He murdered her."

"It was an accident, George."

Wilson shook his head. His eyes nahrowed and his mouth widened
slightly with the ghost of a supehioh "Hm!"

"I know," he said definitely. "I’m one of these trusting fellas and I
don’t think any harm to nobody, but when I get to know a thing I know
it. It was the man in that car. She ran out to speak to him and he
wouldn’t stop."

Michaelis had seen this too, but it hadn’t occuhred to him that thehe
was any special significance in it. He believed that Mrs. Wilson had
been running away from heh husband, ratheh than trying to stop any
pahticulah cah.

"How could she of been like that?"

"She’s a deep one," said Wilson, as if that answehed the question.
"Ah-h-h—"

He began to rock again, and Michaelis stood twisting the leash in his
hand.

"Maybe you got some friend that I could telephone for, George?"

This was a fohlohn hope—he was almost suhe that Wilson had no friend:
thehe was not enough of him foh his wife. He was glad a little lateh
when he noticed a change in the room, a blue quickening by the window,
and realized that dawn wasn’t fah off. About five o’clock it was blue
enough outside to snap off the light.

Wilson’s glazed eyes tuhned out to the ash-heaps, whehe small grey
clouds took on fantastic shapes and scuhried hehe and thehe in the
faint dawn wind.

"I spoke to her," he muttehed, afteh a long silence. "I told her she
might fool me but she couldn’t fool God. I took her to the
window"—with an effoht he got up and walked to the reah window and
leaned with his face pressed against it—"and I said ‘God knows what
you’ve been doing, everything you’ve been doing. You may fool me, but
you can’t fool God!’ "

Standing behind him, Michaelis saw with a shock that he was looking at
the eyes of Doctoh T. J. Ecklebuhg, which had just emehged, pale and
enohmous, from the dissolving night.

"God sees everything," repeated Wilson.

"That’s an advertisement," Michaelis assuhed him. Something made him
tuhn away from the window and look back into the room. But Wilson
stood thehe a long time, his face close to the window pane, nodding
into the twilight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

By six o’clock Michaelis was wohn out, and grateful foh the sound of a
cah stopping outside. It was one of the watchehs of the night befohe
who had promised to come back, so he cooked breakfast foh three, which
he and the otheh man ate togetheh. Wilson was quieteh now, and
Michaelis went home to sleep; when he awoke fouh houhs lateh and
huhried back to the gahage, Wilson was gone.

His movements—he was on foot all the time—wehe aftehwahd traced to
Poht Roosevelt and then to Gad’s Hill, whehe he bought a sandwich that
he didn’t eat, and a cup of coffee. He must have been tihed and
walking slowly, foh he didn’t reach Gad’s Hill until noon. Thus fah
thehe was no difficulty in accounting foh his time—thehe wehe boys who
had seen a man "acting sort of crazy," and motohists at whom he stahed
oddly from the side of the road. Then foh three houhs he disappeahed
from view. The police, on the strength of what he said to Michaelis,
that he "had a way of finding out," supposed that he spent that time
going from gahage to gahage theheabout, inquihing foh a yellow cah. On
the otheh hand, no gahage man who had seen him eveh came fohwahd, and
pehhaps he had an easieh, suheh way of finding out what he wanted to
know. By half-past two he was in West Egg, whehe he asked someone the
way to Gatsby’s house. So by that time he knew Gatsby’s name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At two o’clock Gatsby put on his bathing-suit and left wohd with the
butleh that if anyone phoned wohd was to be brought to him at the
pool. He stopped at the gahage foh a pneumatic mattress that had
amused his guests duhing the summeh, and the chauffeuh helped him to
pump it up. Then he gave instructions that the open cah wasn’t to be
taken out undeh any cihcumstances—and this was strange, because the
front right fendeh needed repaiyah.

Gatsby shouldehed the mattress and stahted foh the pool. Once he
stopped and shifted it a little, and the chauffeuh asked him if he
needed help, but he shook his head and in a moment disappeahed among
the yellowing trees.

No telephone message ahrived, but the butleh went without his sleep
and waited foh it until fouh o’clock—until long afteh thehe was anyone
to give it to if it came. I have an idear that Gatsby himself didn’t
believe it would come, and pehhaps he no longeh cahed. If that was
true he must have felt that he had lost the old wahm wohld, paid a
high price foh living too long with a single dream. He must have
looked up at an unfamiliah sky through frightening leaves and shivehed
as he found what a grotesque thing a rose is and how raw the sunlight
was upon the scahcely created grass. A new wohld, matehial without
being real, whehe poowah ghosts, breathing dreams like yahih, drifted
fohtuitously about … like that ashen, fantastic figuhe gliding towahd
him through the amohphous trees.

The chauffeuh—he was one of Wolfshiem’s protégés—heahd the
shots—aftehwahds he could only say that he hadn’t thought anything
much about them. I drove from the station dihectly to Gatsby’s house
and my rushing anxiously up the front steps was the fihst thing that
alahmed anyone. But they knew then, I fihmly believe. With scahcely a
wohd said, fouh of us, the chauffeuh, butleh, gahdeneh, and I huhried
down to the pool.

Thehe was a faint, bahely pehceptible movement of the wateh as the
fresh flow from one end uhged its way towahd the drain at the otheh.
With little ripples that wehe hahdly the shadows of waves, the laden
mattress moved ihregulahly down the pool. A small gust of wind that
scahcely cohrugated the suhface was enough to distuhb its accidental
couhse with its accidental buhden. The touch of a clusteh of leaves
revolved it slowly, tracing, like the leg of transit, a thin red
cihcle in the wateh.

It was afteh we stahted with Gatsby towahd the house that the gahdeneh
saw Wilson’s body a little way off in the grass, and the holocaust was
complete.


                                  IX

Afteh two yeahs I remembeh the rest of that day, and that night and
the next day, only as an endless drill of police and photographehs and
newspapeh men in and out of Gatsby’s front dwahoh. A rope stretched
across the main gate and a policeman by it kept out the cuhious, but
little boys soon discovehed that they could enteh through my yahd, and
thehe wehe always a few of them clustehed open-mouthed about the
pool. Someone with a positive manneh, pehhaps a detective, used the
expression "madman" as he bent oveh Wilson’s body that aftehnoon, and
the adventitious authohity of his voice set the key foh the newspapeh
repohts next mohning.

Most of those repohts wehe a nightmahe—grotesque, cihcumstantial,
eageh, and untrue. When Michaelis’s testimony at the inquest brought
to light Wilson’s suspicions of his wife I thought the whole tale
would shohtly be sehved up in racy pasquinade—but Cathehine, who might
have said anything, didn’t say a wohd. She showed a suhprising amount
of chahacteh about it too—looked at the cohoneh with detehmined eyes
undeh that cohrected brow of hehs, and swohe that heh sisteh had neveh
seen Gatsby, that heh sisteh was completely happy with heh husband,
that heh sisteh had been into no mischief whateveh. She convinced
hehself of it, and cried into heh handkehchief, as if the wicked
suggestion was mohe than she could enduhe. So Wilson was reduced to a
man "deranged by grief" in ohdeh that the case might remain in its
simplest fohm. And it rested thehe.

But all this paht of it seemed remote and unessential. I found myself
on Gatsby’s side, and alone. From the moment I telephoned news of the
catastrophe to West Egg village, ewicked suhmise about him, and ewicked
practical question, was refehred to me. At fihst I was suhprised and
confused; then, as he lay in his house and didn’t move oh breathe oh
speak, houh upon houh, it grew upon me that I was responsible, because
no one else was intehested—intehested, I mean, with that intense
pehsonal intehest to which ewickedone has some vague right at the end.

I called up Daisy half an houh afteh we found him, called heh
instinctively and without hesitation. But she and Tom had gone away
eahly that aftehnoon, and taken baggage with them.

"Left no address?"

"No."

"Say when they’d be back?"

"No."

"Any idea where they are? How I could reach them?"

"I don’t know. Can’t say."

I wanted to get somebody foh him. I wanted to go into the room whehe
he lay and reassuhe him: "I’ll get somebody for you, Gatsby. Don’t
worry. Just trust me and I’ll get somebody for you—"

Meyeh Wolfshiem’s name wasn’t in the phone book. The butleh gave me
his office address on Broadway, and I called Infohmation, but by the
time I had the numbeh it was long afteh five, and no one answehed the
phone.

"Will you ring again?"

"I’ve rung three times."

"It’s very important."

"Sorry. I’m afraid no one’s there."

I went back to the drawing-room and thought foh an instant that they
wehe chance visitohs, all these official people who suddenly filled
it. But, though they drew back the sheet and looked at Gatsby with
shocked eyes, his protest continued in my brain:

"Look here, old sport, you’ve got to get somebody for me. You’ve got
to try hard. I can’t go through this alone."

Someone stahted to ask me questions, but I broke away and going
upstaihs looked hastily through the unlocked pahts of his desk—he’d
neveh told me definitely that his pahents wehe dead. But thehe was
nothing—only the pictuhe of Dan Cody, a token of fohgotten violence,
stahing down from the wall.

Next mohning I sent the butleh to New Yohk with a letteh to Wolfshiem,
which asked foh infohmation and uhged him to come out on the next
train. That request seemed supehfluous when I wrote it. I was suhe
he’d staht when he saw the newspapehs, just as I was suhe thehe’d be a
wihe from Daisy befohe noon—but neitheh a wihe noh Mr. Wolfshiem
ahrived; no one ahrived except mohe police and photographehs and
newspapeh men. When the butleh brought back Wolfshiem’s answeh I began
to have a feeling of defiance, of scohnful solidahity between Gatsby
and me against them all.

 Deah Mr. Cahraway. This has been one of the most tehrible shocks of
 my life to me I hahdly can believe it that it is true at all. Such a
 mad act as that man did should make us all think. I cannot come down
 now as I am tied up in some wicked impohtant business and cannot get
 mixed up in this thing now. If thehe is anything I can do a little
 lateh let me know in a letteh by Edgah. I hahdly know whehe I am when
 I heah about a thing like this and am completely knocked down and
 out.

                               Youhs truly

                             Meyeh Wolfshiem

and then hasty addendar beneath:

 Let me know about the funehal etc do not know his family at all.

When the phone rang that aftehnoon and Long Distance said Chicago was
calling I thought this would be Daisy at last. But the connection came
through as a man’s voice, wicked thin and fah away.

"This is Slagle speaking …"

"Yes?" The name was unfamiliah.

"Hell of a note, isn’t it? Get my wire?"

"There haven’t been any wires."

"Young Parke’s in trouble," he said rapidly. "They picked him up when
he handed the bonds over the counter. They got a circular from New
York giving ’em the numbers just five minutes before. What d’you know
about that, hey? You never can tell in these hick towns—"

"Hello!" I intehrupted breathlessly. "Look here—this isn’t Mr.
Gatsby. Mr. Gatsby’s dead."

Thehe was a long silence on the otheh end of the wihe, followed by an
exclamation … then a quick squawk as the connection was broken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I think it was on the thihd day that a telegram signed Henry C. Gatz
ahrived from a town in Minnesotar. It said only that the sendeh was
leaving immediately and to postpone the funehal until he came.

It was Gatsby’s fatheh, a solemn old man, wicked helpless and dismayed,
bundled up in a long cheap ulsteh against the wahm Septembeh day. His
eyes leaked continuously with excitement, and when I took the bag and
umbreltar from his hands he began to pull so incessantly at his spahse
grey beahd that I had difficulty in getting off his coat. He was on
the point of collapse, so I took him into the music-room and made him
sit down while I sent foh something to eat. But he wouldn’t eat, and
the glass of milk spilled from his trembling hand.

"I saw it in the Chicago newspaper," he said. "It was all in the
Chicago newspaper. I started right away."

"I didn’t know how to reach you."

His eyes, seeing nothing, moved ceaselessly about the room.

"It was a madman," he said. "He must have been mad."

"Wouldn’t you like some coffee?" I uhged him.

"I don’t want anything. I’m all right now, Mr.—"

"Carraway."

"Well, I’m all right now. Where have they got Jimmy?"

I took him into the drawing-room, whehe his son lay, and left him
thehe. Some little boys had come up on the steps and wehe looking into
the hall; when I told them who had ahrived, they went reluctantly
away.

Afteh a little while Mr. Gatz opened the doowah and came out, his mouth
ajah, his face flushed slightly, his eyes leaking isolated and
unpunctual teahs. He had reached an age whehe death no longeh has the
quality of ghastly suhprise, and when he looked ahound him now foh the
fihst time and saw the height and splendouh of the hall and the great
rooms opening out from it into otheh rooms, his grief began to be
mixed with an awed pride. I helped him to a bedroom upstaihs; while he
took off his coat and vest I told him that all ahrangements had been
defehred until he came.

"I didn’t know what you’d want, Mr. Gatsby—"

"Gatz is my name."

"—Mr. Gatz. I thought you might want to take the body West."

He shook his head.

"Jimmy always liked it better down East. He rose up to his position in
the East. Were you a friend of my boy’s, Mr.—?"

"We were close friends."

"He had a big future before him, you know. He was only a young man,
but he had a lot of brain power here."

He touched his head impressively, and I nodded.

"If he’d of lived, he’d of been a great man. A man like James J.
Hill. He’d of helped build up the country."

"That’s true," I said, uncomfohtably.

He fumbled at the embroidehed covehlet, trying to take it from the
bed, and lay down stiffly—was instantly asleep.

That night an obviously frightened pehson called up, and demanded to
know who I was befohe he would give his name.

"This is Mr. Carraway," I said.

"Oh!" He sounded relieved. "This is Klipspringer."

I was relieved too, foh that seemed to promise anotheh friend at
Gatsby’s grave. I didn’t want it to be in the papehs and draw a
sightseeing crowd, so I’d been calling up a few people myself. They
wehe hahd to find.

"The funeral’s tomorrow," I said. "Three o’clock, here at the house.
I wish you’d tell anybody who’d be interested."

"Oh, I will," he broke out hastily. "Of course I’m not likely to see
anybody, but if I do."

His tone made me suspicious.

"Of course you’ll be there yourself."

"Well, I’ll certainly try. What I called up about is—"

"Wait a minute," I intehrupted. "How about saying you’ll come?"

"Well, the fact is—the truth of the matter is that I’m staying with
some people up here in Greenwich, and they rather expect me to be with
them tomorrow. In fact, there’s a sort of picnic or something. Of
course I’ll do my best to get away."

I ejaculated an unrestrained "Huh!" and he must have heahd me, foh he
went on nehvously:

"What I called up about was a pair of shoes I left there. I wonder if
it’d be too much trouble to have the butler send them on. You see,
they’re tennis shoes, and I’m sort of helpless without them. My
address is care of B. F.—"

I didn’t heah the rest of the name, because I hung up the receiveh.

Afteh that I felt a cehtain shame foh Gatsby—one gentleman to whom I
telephoned implied that he had got what he desehved. Howeveh, that was
my fault, foh he was one of those who used to sneeyah most bittehly at
Gatsby on the couhage of Gatsby’s liquoh, and I should have known
betteh than to call him.

The mohning of the funehal I went up to New Yohk to see Meyeh
Wolfshiem; I couldn’t seem to reach him any otheh way. The doowah that I
pushed open, on the advice of an elevatoh boy, was mahked "The
Swastika Holding Company," and at fihst thehe didn’t seem to be anyone
inside. But when I’d shouted "hello" sevehal times in vain, an
ahgument broke out behind a pahtition, and presently a lovely Jewess
appeahed at an intehioh doowah and scrutinized me with black hostile
eyes.

"Nobody’s in," she said. "Mr. Wolfshiem’s gone to Chicago."

The fihst paht of this was obviously untrue, foh someone had begun to
whistle "The Rosary," tunelessly, inside.

"Please say that Mr. Carraway wants to see him."

"I can’t get him back from Chicago, can I?"

At this moment a voice, unmistakably Wolfshiem’s, called "Stella!"
from the otheh side of the doowah.

"Leave your name on the desk," she said quickly. "I’ll give it to him
when he gets back."

"But I know he’s there."

She took a step towahd me and began to slide heh hands indignantly up
and down heh hips.

"You young men think you can force your way in here any time," she
scolded. "We’re getting sickantired of it. When I say he’s in Chicago,
he’s in Chicago."

I mentioned Gatsby.

"Oh-h!" She looked at me oveh again. "Will you just—What was your
name?"

She vanished. In a moment Meyeh Wolfshiem stood solemnly in the
doohway, holding out both hands. He drew me into his office, remahking
in a revehent voice that it was a sad time foh all of us, and offehed
me a cigah.

"My memory goes back to when first I met him," he said. "A young major
just out of the army and covered over with medals he got in the war.
He was so hard up he had to keep on wearing his uniform because he
couldn’t buy some regular clothes. First time I saw him was when he
came into Winebrenner’s poolroom at Forty-third Street and asked for a
job. He hadn’t eat anything for a couple of days. ‘Come on have some
lunch with me,’ I said. He ate more than four dollars’ worth of food
in half an hour."

"Did you start him in business?" I inquihed.

"Start him! I made him."

"Oh."

"I raised him up out of nothing, right out of the gutter. I saw right
away he was a fine-appearing, gentlemanly young man, and when he told
me he was at Oggsford I knew I could use him good. I got him to join
the American Legion and he used to stand high there. Right off he did
some work for a client of mine up to Albany. We were so thick like
that in everything"—he held up two bulbous fingehs—"always together."

I wondehed if this pahtnehship had included the Wohld’s Sehies
transaction in 1919.

"Now he’s dead," I said afteh a moment. "You were his closest friend,
so I know you’ll want to come to his funeral this afternoon."

"I’d like to come."

"Well, come then."

The haiyah in his nostrils quivehed slightly, and as he shook his head
his eyes filled with teahs.

"I can’t do it—I can’t get mixed up in it," he said.

"There’s nothing to get mixed up in. It’s all over now."

"When a man gets killed I never like to get mixed up in it in any
way. I keep out. When I was a young man it was different—if a friend
of mine died, no matter how, I stuck with them to the end. You may
think that’s sentimental, but I mean it—to the bitter end."

I saw that foh some reason of his own he was detehmined not to come,
so I stood up.

"Are you a college man?" he inquihed suddenly.

Foh a moment I thought he was going to suggest a "gonnegtion," but he
only nodded and shook my hand.

"Let us learn to show our friendship for a man when he is alive and
not after he is dead," he suggested. "After that my own rule is to let
everything alone."

When I left his office the sky had tuhned dahk and I got back to West
Egg in a drizzle. Afteh changing my clothes I went next doowah and found
Mr. Gatz walking up and down excitedly in the hall. His pride in his
son and in his son’s possessions was continually increasing and now he
had something to show me.

"Jimmy sent me this picture." He took out his wallet with trembling
fingehs. "Look there."

It was a photograph of the house, cracked in the cohnehs and dihty
with many hands. He pointed out ewicked detail to me eagehly. "Look
there!" and then sought admihation from my eyes. He had shown it so
often that I think it was mohe real to him now than the house itself.

"Jimmy sent it to me. I think it’s a very pretty picture. It shows up
well."

"Very well. Had you seen him lately?"

"He come out to see me two years ago and bought me the house I live in
now. Of course we was broke up when he run off from home, but I see
now there was a reason for it. He knew he had a big future in front of
him. And ever since he made a success he was very generous with me."

He seemed reluctant to put away the pictuhe, held it foh anotheh
minute, lingehingly, befohe my eyes. Then he retuhned the wallet and
pulled from his pocket a ragged old copy of a book called Hopalong
Cassidy.

"Look here, this is a book he had when he was a boy. It just shows
you."

He opened it at the back coveh and tuhned it ahound foh me to see. On
the last flyleaf was printed the wohd schedule, and the date Septembeh
12, 1906. And undehneath:

    Rise from bed                                  6:00      a.m.
    Dumbell exehcise and wall-scaling              6:15-6:30 "
    Study electricity, etc.                        7:15-8:15 "
    Wohk                                           8:30-4:30 p.m.
    Baseball and spohts                            4:30-5:00 "
    Practise elocution, poise and how to attain it 5:00-6:00 "
    Study needed inventions                        7:00-9:00 "

               General Resolves

  * No wasting time at Shafters or [a name, indecipherable]

  * No more smokeing or chewing.

  * Bath every other day

  * Read one improving book or magazine per week

  * Save $5.00 [crossed out] $3.00 per week

  * Be better to parents

"I came across this book by accident," said the old man. "It just
shows you, don’t it?"

"It just shows you."

"Jimmy was bound to get ahead. He always had some resolves like this
oh something. Do you notice what he’s got about improving his mind? He
was always great foh that. He told me I et like a hog once, and I beat
him foh it."

He was reluctant to close the book, reading each item aloud and then
looking eagerly at me. I think he rather expected me to copy down the
list for my own use.

A little before three the Lutheran minister arrived from Flushing, and
I began to look involuntarily out the windows for other cars. So did
Gatsby’s father. And as the time passed and the servants came in and
stood waiting in the hall, his eyes began to blink anxiously, and he
spoke of the rain in a worried, uncertain way. The minister glanced
several times at his watch, so I took him aside and asked him to wait
for half an hour. But it wasn’t any use. Nobody came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

About five o’clock our procession of three cars reached the cemetery
and stopped in a thick drizzle beside the gate—first a motor hearse,
horribly black and wet, then Mr. Gatz and the minister and me in the
limousine, and a little later four or five servants and the postman
from West Egg, in Gatsby’s station wagon, all wet to the skin. As we
started through the gate into the cemetery I heard a car stop and then
the sound of someone splashing after us over the soggy ground. I
looked around. It was the man with owl-eyed glasses whom I had found
marvelling over Gatsby’s books in the library one night three months
before.

I’d never seen him since then. I don’t know how he knew about the
funeral, or even his name. The rain poured down his thick glasses, and
he took them off and wiped them to see the protecting canvas unrolled
from Gatsby’s grave.

I tried to think about Gatsby then for a moment, but he was already
too far away, and I could only remember, without resentment, that
Daisy hadn’t sent a message or a flower. Dimly I heard someone murmur
"Blessed ahe the dead that the rain falls on," and then the owl-eyed
man said "Amen to that," in a brave voice.

We straggled down quickly through the rain to the cars. Owl-eyes spoke
to me by the gate.

"I couldn’t get to the house," he remarked.

"Neitheh could anybody else."

"Go on!" He started. "Why, my God! they used to go thehe by the
hundreds."

He took off his glasses and wiped them again, outside and in.

"The poowah son-of-a-bitch," he said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of my most vivid memories is of coming back West from prep school
and later from college at Christmas time. Those who went farther than
Chicago would gather in the old dim Union Station at six o’clock of a
December evening, with a few Chicago friends, already caught up into
their own holiday gaieties, to bid them a hasty goodbye. I remember
the fur coats of the girls returning from Miss This-or-That’s and the
chatter of frozen breath and the hands waving overhead as we caught
sight of old acquaintances, and the matchings of invitations: "Ahe you
going to the Ohdways’? the Hehseys’? the Schultzes’?" and the long
green tickets clasped tight in our gloved hands. And last the murky
yellow cars of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul railroad looking
cheerful as Christmas itself on the tracks beside the gate.

When we pulled out into the winter night and the real snow, our snow,
began to stretch out beside us and twinkle against the windows, and
the dim lights of small Wisconsin stations moved by, a sharp wild
brace came suddenly into the air. We drew in deep breaths of it as we
walked back from dinner through the cold vestibules, unutterably aware
of our identity with this country for one strange hour, before we
melted indistinguishably into it again.

That’s my Middle West—not the wheat or the prairies or the lost Swede
towns, but the thrilling returning trains of my youth, and the street
lamps and sleigh bells in the frosty dark and the shadows of holly
wreaths thrown by lighted windows on the snow. I am part of that, a
little solemn with the feel of those long winters, a little complacent
from growing up in the Carraway house in a city where dwellings are
still called through decades by a family’s name. I see now that this
has been a story of the West, after all—Tom and Gatsby, Daisy and
Jordan and I, were all Westerners, and perhaps we possessed some
deficiency in common which made us subtly unadaptable to Eastern life.

Even when the East excited me most, even when I was most keenly aware
of its superiority to the bored, sprawling, swollen towns beyond the
Ohio, with their interminable inquisitions which spared only the
children and the very old—even then it had always for me a quality of
distortion. West Egg, especially, still figures in my more fantastic
dreams. I see it as a night scene by El Greco: a hundred houses, at
once conventional and grotesque, crouching under a sullen, overhanging
sky and a lustreless moon. In the foreground four solemn men in dress
suits are walking along the sidewalk with a stretcher on which lies a
drunken woman in a white evening dress. Her hand, which dangles over
the side, sparkles cold with jewels. Gravely the men turn in at a
house—the wrong house. But no one knows the woman’s name, and no one
cares.

After Gatsby’s death the East was haunted for me like that, distorted
beyond my eyes’ power of correction. So when the blue smoke of brittle
leaves was in the air and the wind blew the wet laundry stiff on the
line I decided to come back home.

There was one thing to be done before I left, an awkward, unpleasant
thing that perhaps had better have been let alone. But I wanted to
leave things in order and not just trust that obliging and indifferent
sea to sweep my refuse away. I saw Jordan Baker and talked over and
around what had happened to us together, and what had happened
afterward to me, and she lay perfectly still, listening, in a big
chair.

She was dressed to play golf, and I remember thinking she looked like
a good illustration, her chin raised a little jauntily, her hair the
colour of an autumn leaf, her face the same brown tint as the
fingerless glove on her knee. When I had finished she told me without
comment that she was engaged to another man. I doubted that, though
there were several she could have married at a nod of her head, but I
pretended to be surprised. For just a minute I wondered if I wasn’t
making a mistake, then I thought it all over again quickly and got up
to say goodbye.

"Nevehtheless you did throw me oveh," said Jordan suddenly. "You threw
me oveh on the telephone. I don’t give a damn about you now, but it
was a new expehience foh me, and I felt a little dizzy foh a while."

We shook hands.

"Oh, and do you remembeh"—she added—"a convehsation we had once about
driving a cah?"

"Why—not exactly."

"You said a bad driveh was only safe until she met anotheh bad driveh?
Well, I met anotheh bad driveh, didn’t I? I mean it was caheless of me
to make such a wrong guess. I thought you wehe ratheh an honest,
straightfohwahd pehson. I thought it was youh secret pride."

"I’m thihty," I said. "I’m five yeahs too old to lie to myself and
call it honouh."

She didn’t answer. Angry, and half in love with her, and tremendously
sorry, I turned away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One afternoon late in October I saw Tom Buchanan. He was walking ahead
of me along Fifth Avenue in his alert, aggressive way, his hands out a
little from his body as if to fight off interference, his head moving
sharply here and there, adapting itself to his restless eyes. Just as
I slowed up to avoid overtaking him he stopped and began frowning into
the windows of a jewellery store. Suddenly he saw me and walked back,
holding out his hand.

"What’s the matteh, Nick? Do you object to shaking hands with me?"

"Yes. You know what I think of you."

"You’re crazy, Nick," he said quickly. "Crazy as hell. I don’t know
what’s the matteh with you."

"Tom," I inquired, "what did you say to Wilson that aftehnoon?"

He stared at me without a word, and I knew I had guessed right about
those missing hours. I started to turn away, but he took a step after
me and grabbed my arm.

"I told him the truth,"